---
title: "DemoCamp 21"
date: 2009-07-29 05:09:27
year: 2009
---
<a href="http://democamp.com/2009/07/21/dct21-the-schedule/">Toronto's 21st DemoCamp</a> was held last night in the Rogers Theatre.  I enjoyed it: it was good to see friends, and great to see what's going on in Toronto's tech community. Here's my rundown:
<ul>
	<li>Venue: better than the pub we were in the last couple of times, but banked seating (and no beer) just doesn't feel right either.</li>
	<li>Jon Udell: I think his ideas about syndicating calendar information are a big deal; I was surprised there were so few questions (maybe because he was first up?).</li>
	<li>Saul Colt/Zoocasa: I was expecting a demo; we got slideware.</li>
	<li>Christine Renaud/ArtAnywhere: very polished Ignite presentation on a new web-based art rental business.</li>
	<li>Brian Sharwood/HomeStars: another Ignite about bringing social media to contractors. Enjoyed it---he clearly likes what he's doing.</li>
	<li>Alan Lysne/Cascadia: live coding to show off a cross-platform app library for mobile devices.  Very cool.</li>
	<li>Shaun MacDonald/MashupArts: in-the-web editor for birthday cards, greeting cards, etc.</li>
	<li>Dan Wood/WeGoWeGo: another "what's on where" search engine; good demo.</li>
	<li>Ben Vinegar/Guestlist: best demo of the night---guest lists have been done before, but Ben (a former project student) has done a really nice re-think with some cool GUI features.</li>
	<li>Jason Roks/GuiGoog: the other best demo of the night---Jason coped with technical problems (including having to run on IE6) with good, if acerbic, humor.</li>
</ul>
Overall impressions: several A-grade presentations and good conversations. Our undergrads are doing their demos this morning (Wednesday, July 29) from 10-12 am in Room 1200 of the Bahen Centre at 40 St. George Street; everyone's welcome to come and see them try to repeat last night's success.
