- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diacritic#Languages_with_letters_containing_diacritics
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Latin-script_letters#Letters_with_diacritics

## A

**Abaya**: a full-length, sleeveless outer garment worn by Arabs.

**Abugida**: a writing system in which consonant--vowel sequences are written as
a unit: each unit is based on a consonant letter, and vowel notation is
secondary.

**Achondrite**: a stony meteorite containing no small mineral granules
(chondrules).

**Adit**: a horizontal passage leading into a mine for the purposes of access or
drainage.

**Aegrotat**: a certificate stating that a university student is too ill to
attend an examination.

**Alap**: the improvised section of a raga, forming a prologue to the formal
expression.

**Alass**: a large depression in the ground formed by the thawing of a large
area of ice-rich permafrost.

**Alidade**: a sighting device or pointer for determining directions or
measuring angles, used in surveying and (formerly) astronomy.

**Alkahest**: the hypothetical universal solvent sought by alchemists.

**Anagenesis**: species formation without branching of the evolutionary line of
descent.

**Anaphor**: a word or phrase that refers back to an earlier word or phrase.

**Angary**: the right of a country at war to seize or destroy neutral property
out of military necessity, provided that compensation is paid.

**Annulus**: a ring-shaped object, structure, or region.

**Aphesis**: leaving off the start of a word.

**Apocope**: leaving off the end of a word.

**Apophenia**: the spontaneous perception of connections and meaningfulness of
unrelated phenomena.

**Aposematic**: warning, as in coloration.

**Apotropaic**: having the power to avert evil influences or bad luck.

**Appanage**: any customary and rightful perquisite appropriate to your station
in life; particularly, a grant by a sovereign or a legislative body of resources
to maintain a dependent member of a ruling family.

**Apsis**: (plural apsides) either of two points on the orbit of a planet or
satellite that are nearest to or furthest from the body round which it moves.

**Architectonic**: of or relating to the systematic arrangement of knowledge.

**Asterism**: a prominent pattern or group of stars that is smaller than a
constellation, or a group of three asterisks drawing attention to a piece of
text.

**Asyndeton**: the omission or absence of a conjunction between parts of a
sentence, as in I came, I saw, I conquered.

**Auxotroph**: a mutant organism (especially a bacterium or fungus) that
requires a particular additional nutrient which the normal strain does not.

**Avulsion**: a wound in which there is a tearing away of a structure or part; a
sudden loss or gain of land as the result of action of water or a shift in a bed
of a river which has been used as a boundary by property owners.

**Avunculate**: the special relationship in some societies between a man and his
sister's son.

**Axenic**: a culture that is free from living organisms other than the species
required (i.e., a monoculture).

**Axiology**: the study of values and value judgments, subsuming bethics and
aesthetics.

**Azan**: the Muslim call to ritual prayer made by a muezzin from the minaret of
a mosque.

## B

**Babiche**: raw hide, typically formed into strips, as used by North American
Indians for making fastenings and animal snares.

**Babouche**: a heelless slipper, typically in oriental style.

**Barbola**: the craft of making small models of fruit or flowers from a plastic
paste.

**Bargeboard**: a board, typically an ornamental one, fixed to the gable end of
a roof to hide the ends of the roof timbers.

**Battue**: the driving of game toward hunters by beaters.

**Beestings**: the first milk produced by a cow or goat after giving birth.

**Bergen**: a type of rucksack supported by a frame, used by the military.

**Bibliopole**: a person who buys and sells rare books.

**Bice**: a medium blue or blue-green pigment made from basic copper carbonate.

**Bocage**: pastureland divided into small hedged fields interspersed with
groves of trees; also, the modelling of leaves, flowers, and plants in clay,
especially for porcelain figurines.

**Bonze**: a Japanese or Chinese Buddhist religious teacher.

**Bookland**: an area of common land granted by charter to a private owner
before the Norman conquest. Term eventually applied to all land that wasn't
folcland, i.e. land subject to traditional communal obligations.

**Borborygmus**: a rumbling or gurgling noise made by the movement of fluid and
gas in the intestines.

**Bottomry**: a system of merchant insurance in which a ship is used as security
against a loan to finance a voyage, the lender losing their money if the ship
sinks.

**Burgee**: a flag bearing the colours or emblem of a sailing club, typically
triangular.

## C

**Cabochon**: a gem that has been polished but not faceted.

**Cacoethes**: an urge to do something inadvisable.

**Cadastral**: the division of lands into units for surveying, taxation, or
administrative purposes.

**Calque**: a word or phrase borrowed from another language by literal,
word-for-word or root-for-root translation.

**Cannelure**: a groove around the cylindrical part of a bullet.

**Cantrail**: a piece of metal or timber supporting the roof of a railway
carriage.

**Caracole**: a half turn to the right or left by a horse.

**Caryopsis**: dry seedlike fruit produced by cereal grasses.

**Cataphor**: a word or phrase that refers to or stands for a later word or
phrase (e.g. in when they saw Ruth, the men looked slightly abashed, "they" is
used as a cataphor for the men).

**Catechesis**: religious instruction given with a catechism in preparation for
Christian baptism or confirmation.

**Cenote**: a natural underground reservoir of water such as occurs in the
limestone of Yucatan, Mexico.

**Cerecloth**: waxed cloth used for wrapping a corpse.

**Cherumbelle**: a musical instrument.

**Chowki**: a police station or jail; a low wooden seat or stool.

**Chuppah** (pl. chuppot): a canopy beneath which Jewish marriage ceremonies are
performed.

**Cicisbeo**: a married woman's male companion or lover.

**Clabber**: milk that has naturally clotted on souring.

**Clacking**: removing lumps of mud from wool.

**Cloisonne**: enamel work in which the different colours are separated by
strips of flattened wire placed edgeways on a metal backing.

**Consuetude**: a custom, especially one having legal force.

**Conventicle**: a secret or unlawful religious meeting, typically of
nonconformists.

**Couvade**: the custom in some cultures in which a man takes to his bed and
goes through certain rituals when his child is being born, as though he were
physically affected by the birth.

**Crypsis**: concealment.

**Cuesta**: a ridge with a gentle slope (dip) on one side and a steep slope
(scarp) on the other.

**Cyclopia** (or *synophthalmia*): a birth defect in which a normally two-eyed
animal is born with only a single fused eye, generally disproportionately large
and centered on the face above the area where the nose would usually appear.

## D

**Dargah**: the tomb or shrine of a Muslim saint.

**Dazibao**: a wall poster written in large characters, expressing a political
opinion.

**Debitage**: waste material produced in the making of prehistoric stone
implements.

**Deterge**: to clean something thoroughly.

**Diwan**: a central finance department, chief administrative office, or
regional governing body.

**Dosa**: a pancake made from rice flour and ground pulses, typically served
with a spiced vegetable filling.

**Dottle**: a remnant of tobacco left in a pipe after smoking.

**Draa**: a large sand dune, hundreds of kilometers long and hundreds of meters
high.

**Dzud**: a Mongolian term for an extremely snowy winter in which livestock are
unable to find fodder through the snow cover, and large numbers of animals die
due to starvation and the cold.

## E

**Emacity**: fondness for buying things, from the Latin verb emere, meaning 'to
buy'.

**Embrasure**: an opening in a wall or parapet which is bevelled or splayed out
on the inside, typically one around a window or door.

**Entheogen**: a chemical (e.g. mescaline) that inspires god-like thoughts or
states.

**Epeiric**: related to the shallow, salty seas covering part of a continental
shelf.

**Epiphyte**: an air-living plant.

**Erhu**: a Chinese two-stringed musical instrument held in the lap and played
with a bow.

**Estivation**: summer-time hibernation.

**Exegesis**: extensive critical interpretation of a holy text; the person who
does it is an exegete.

## F

**Farouche**: fierce or wild; exhiting withdrawn, sullen temperament.

**Farpotshket**: something that has been broken in the process of trying to fix
it.

**Fernweh**: longing for far-off places.

**Fictile**: made of earth or clay by a potter; relating to pottery or its
manufacture.

**Fid**: either a square wooden or iron bar which takes the weight of a topmast
stepped to a lower mast by being passed through holes in both masts, or a
conical pin or spike used in splicing rope.

**Fideology**: the study and practice of faith as trust.

**Fimbriated**: having a fringe or border of hair-like or finger-like
projections.

**Finnesko**: a boot of tanned reindeer skin with the hair on the outside.

**Firn**: crystalline or granular snow, especially on the upper part of a
glacier, where it has not yet been compressed into ice.

**Flor**: yeast allowed to develop in a whitish film on the surface of dry
(fino) sherries and similar wines during fermentation.

**Feuilleton**: a part of a newspaper or magazine devoted to fiction, criticism,
or light literature.

**Fossick**: hunt around for, or ferret out.

**Frass**: the more or less solid excreta of insects.

**Frazil**: soft or amorphous ice formed by the accumulation of ice crystals in
water that is too turbulent to freeze solid.

**Fugleman**: a soldier who stands in front of a regiment or company to
demonstrate and maintain time in drilling exercises.

**Fulgurite**: rock formed when lightning fuses grains of sand together.

**Funambulist**: a tightrope walker.

**Fungible**: (of goods contracted for without an individual specimen being
specified) replaceable by another identical item; mutually interchangeable.

**Futhark**: the Scandinavian runic alphabet. The word is made up of the first
six letters of this alphabet: f, u, th, a, r, and k.

## G

**Gabion**: cylindrical basket or container filled with earth, stones, or other
material and used in civil engineering works or (formerly) fortifications.

**Garget**: inflammation of a cow's or ewe's udder.

**Genizah**: a repository of damaged, discarded, or heretical books.

**Glabrous**: skin that is hairless, or a leaf that has no down.

**Glanders**: a rare contagious disease that mainly affects horses,
characterized by swellings below the jaw and mucous discharge from the nostrils.

**Gleed**: a live coal, or a beam of light.

**Glyptic**: of or concerning carving or engraving.

**Gnathic**: having to do with the jaws.

**Grike**: a fissure separating blocks or clints in a limestone pavement.

**Groak**: To silently watch someone while they are eating, hoping to be invited
to join them.

**Guttate**: resembling drops; having drop-like markings.

**Guyot**: an undersea mountain with a flat top.

## H

**Halation**: the spreading of light beyond its proper boundaries to form a fog
round the edges of a bright image in a photograph or on a television screen.

**Hallux**: anatomical term for the big toe.

**Hamartia**: a fatal flaw leading to the downfall of a tragic hero or heroine.

**Hapax legomenon** (or simply "hapax"): a word which occurs only once in either
the written record of a language, the works of an author, or in a single
text.**Haruspex**: a religious official in ancient Rome who foretold the future
by inspecting the entrails of sacrificed animals.

**Haylage**: silage made from grass which has been partially dried.

**Heddle**: a looped wire or cord with an eye in the centre through which a warp
yarn is passed in a loom before going through the reed to control its movement
and divide the threads.

**Herl**: a barb or filament of a feather used in dressing a fishing fly.

**Heteroglossia**: the presence of two or more expressed viewpoints in a text or
other artistic work.

**Hibakusha**: a survivor of either of the explosions at Hiroshima or
Nagasaki. From the Japanese 'hi' (suffer), 'baku' (explosion), and 'sha'
(person).

**Hinny**: the offspring of a female donkey and a male horse.

**Hokonui**: illicitly distilled spirits, especially whisky.

**Horchata**: a milky drink made from tiger nuts.

**Horripilation**: the standing up of hairs on the skin as the result of cold,
fear, or excitement.

**Hyperbaton**: an inversion of the normal order of words, especially for the
sake of emphasis, as in the sentence "this I must see".

**Hypergolic**: igniting spontaneously when coming into contact.

**Hypostyle**: having a roof supported by pillars, typically in several rows.

**Hygrosopic**: tending to absorb moisture.

## I

**Ichnography**: a floor plan for a building.

**Ichnomancy**: the science of making deductions about people or animals by
studying their footsteps.

**Idioticon**: a dictionary of local idiom.

**Ikat**: fabric made using an Indonesian decorative technique in which warp or
weft threads, or both, are tie-dyed before weaving.

**Illepid**: dull or rude in conversation.

**Intendment**: the sense in which the law understands or interprets something,
such as the true intention of an act.

**Inukshuk**: a pile of rocks that looks like a man.

**Isocline**: a line on a diagram or map connecting points of equal gradient or
inclination.

## J

**Jejune**: lacking nutritive value, or dull.

**Jirble**: To pour out (a liquid) with an unsteady hand.

**Jougs**: a hinged iron collar chained to a wall or post, used in medieval
Scotland as an instrument of punishment.

**Jural**: relating to the law.

## K

**Kaiju**: a Japanese word that means "strange beast," but often translated in
English as "monster." Specifically, it is used to refer to a genre of tokusatsu
(special-effects) entertainment.

**Kaizen**: a Japanese business philosophy of continuous improvement of working
practices, personal efficiency, etc.

**Kakistocracy**: government by the worst.

**Kakivak**: a three-pronged fishing spear.

**Kame**: a steep-sided mound of sand and gravel deposited by a melting ice
sheet.

**Kanban**: a Japanese manufacturing system in which the supply of components is
regulated through the use of an instruction card sent along the production line.

**Kanzu**: a long white cotton or linen robe worn by East African men.

**Kaross**: a rug or blanket of sewn animal skins, worn as a garment.

**Kenosis**: the emptying of self (theological).

**Kiddle**: a dam or other barrier in a river, with an opening fitted with nets
to catch fish.

**Kintsukuroi**: to repair broken pottery with gold or silver.

**Koftgari**: a kind of damascene work made in the Indian subcontinent, in which
a pattern traced on steel is inlaid with gold.

**Kula**: an inter-island system of ceremonial gift exchange as a prelude to or
at the same time as regular trading.

**Kumite**: freestyle fighting.

**Kyudo**: the Japanese martial art of longbow archery.

## L

**Laconicum**: room in an ancient Roman baths used for hot-air or steam baths.

**Lahar**: a destructive mudflow on the slopes of a volcano.

**Laminal**: a consonant formed with the blade of the tongue touching the
alveolar ridge.

**Langar**: a communal free kitchen.

**Lapilli**: rock fragments ejected from a volcano.

**Lardon**: a chunk or cube of bacon used to lard meat.

**Lasque**: a flat, ill-formed, or veiny diamond.

**Latten**: alloy of copper and zinc resembling brass, hammered into thin sheets
and used to make monumental brasses and church ornaments.

**Limen**: a threshold below which a stimulus is not perceived or is not
distinguished from another.

**Lipogram**: a written work composed of words chosen so as to avoid the use of
one or more specific alphabetic characters.

**Liquate**: to separate or purify (a metal) by melting it.

**Litotes**: A figure of speech consisting of an understatement in which an
affirmative is expressed by negating its opposite, as in, "This is no small
problem".

**Logomachy**: a fight about words.

**Loriner**: a maker of small iron objects, especially bits, spurs, stirrups,
and mountings for horse's bridles.

**Lustrate**: purify by expiatory sacrifice, ceremonial washing, or some other
ritual action.

## M

**Majuscule**: large lettering, either capital or uncial, in which all the
letters are the same height.

**Malversation**: formal corrupt behaviour in a position of trust, especially in
public office.

**Mandamus**: a judicial writ issued as a command to an inferior court or
ordering a person to perform a public or statutory duty.

**Maquette**: a sculptor's small preliminary model or sketch.

**Marabout**: a Muslim holy man or hermit, especially in North Africa; a shrine
marking the burial place of a Muslim holy man or hermit.

**Maulana**: a Muslim man revered for his religious learning or piety.

**Meronym**: a term which denotes part of something but which is used to refer
to the whole of it, e.g. "faces" when used to mean people in "I see several
familiar faces present".

**Metonymy**: substituting the name of an attribute or feature for the name of
the thing itself (as in "they counted heads").

**Micrurgy**: the manipulation of individual cells under a microscope.

**Middelmannetjie**: a ridge btween the wheel ruts of an unsurfaced road.

**Midrash**: an ancient commentary on part of the Hebrew scriptures, attached to
the biblical text.

**Millet**: a separate legal court for a particular confessional community.

**Misogamy**: the hatred of marriage.

**Misprision**: the deliberate concealment of one's knowledge of a treasonable
act or a felony.

**Mithai**: Indian sweets, such as burfi or gulab jamun.

**Moksha**: release from the cycle of rebirth impelled by the law of karma.

**Moirologist**: a hired mourner.

**Molinology**: the study of mills and milling, done by molinologists.

**Monition**: a warning of impending danger; a formal notice from a bishop or
ecclesiastical court admonishing a person not to do something specified.

**Morganatic**: relating to or denoting a marriage in which neither the spouse
of lower rank, nor any children, have any claim to the possessions or title of
the spouse of higher rank.

**Mortichnia**: a death march.

**Moulin**: a vertical or nearly vertical shaft in a glacier, formed by surface
water percolating through a crack in the ice.

**Mujtahid**: a person accepted as an original authority in Islamic law.  Such
authorities continue to be recognized in the Shia tradition, but Sunni Muslims
accord this status only to the great lawmakers of early Islam.

**Mulesing**: removing folds of skin from around the tail area of a sheep to
reduce flystrike.

**Murenger**: an officer who is responsible for keeping the walls of a city in
good condition.

**Murid**: a follower of a Muslim saint, especially a Sufi disciple.

## N

**Nainsook**: a fine, soft cotton fabric, originally made in the Indian
subcontinent.

**Naology**: the study of churches, temples, and other sacred buildings.

**Naometry**: the measurement of sacred buildings.

**Nauscopy**: the craft of seeing approaching ships (or conversely, landfall)
over the horizon.

**Nephology**: the study or contemplation of clouds.

**Neritic**: relating to or denoting the shallow part of the sea near a coast
and overlying the continental shelf.

**Nonet**: a group of nine people or things, especially musicians; a musical
composition for nine voices or instruments.

**Nullibicity**: the opposite of ubiquity.

**Nyctophobia**: extreme or irrational fear of the night or of darkness.

## O

**Offit**: the underside of an architectural structure, such as an arch, a
balcony, or overhanging eaves.

**Onomast**: a person who studies proper names, especially personal names.

**Ortanique**: a citrus fruit produced by crossing an orange and a tangerine
(the ending comes from "unique").

**Orthostat**: an upright stone or slab forming part of a structure or set in
the ground.

**Oshi**: a move in sumo in which an opponent is pushed backwards or down.

**Osphresiology**: the study of the sense of smell.

**Ovine**: relating to sheep.

## P

**Paillette**: a piece of bright metal used in enamel painting.

**Palafitte**: a lake-dwelling or hut of prehistoric times constructed on piles
over the surface of a lake or other body of water.

**Paludal**: living or occurring in a marshy habitat.

**Pandiculation**: the act of yawning and stretching.

**Pannage**: the right of feeding pigs or other animals in a wood.

**Panurgic**: able to ready to do anything.

**Paradiorthosis**: a false correction.

**Paraph**:a flourish after a signature, originally as a precaution against
forgery.

**Paridolia**: seeing something significant in something meaningless, e.g., a
face in a cloud.

**Peculation**: embezzlement.

**Pelage**: the covering or coat of an animal, whether wool, fur, or hair (but
not feathers).

**Pelorus**: a sighting device on a ship for taking the relative bearings of a
distant object.

**Peloton**: the main field or group of cyclists in a race.

**Peripteral**: (of a building) having a single row of pillars on all sides in
the style of the temples of ancient Greece.

**Peristyle**: a row of columns surrounding a space within a building such as a
court or internal garden or edging a veranda or porch.

**Petcock**: a small valve used for drainage or for reducing pressure.

**Petrichor**: the scent of rain on dry earth, or the scent of dust after rain.

**Petrissage**: a massage technique that involves kneading the body.

**Phatic**: an element of discourse with purely social function, e.g., "How are
you?"

**Phragmosis**: blocking an entrance with a body part.

**Phyllotaxis**: arrangement of leaves on the stem of a plant.

**Piedmont**: a gentle slope leading from the foot of mountains to a region of
flat land.

**Pinchbeck**: an alloy of copper and zinc resembling gold, used in watchmaking
and cheap jewellery.

**Pinfold**: a pound for stray animals; the act of confining an animal in a
pinfold.

**Pirk**: a metal weight fitted with a hook, used as a lure for sea fishing.

**Pirogue**: a long, narrow canoe made from a single tree trunk.

**Pise**: building material of stiff clay or earth, forced between boards which
are removed as it hardens.

**Pisco**: a brandy made from white grapes.

**Playa**: an area of flat, dried-up land, especially a desert basin from which
water evaporates quickly.

**Pleaching**: weaving the branches of live trees together to create a hedge.

**Plinth**: a block used as the base for a column.

**Poi**: a dish made by fermenting taro root, baking it, and pounding it into a
paste.

**Polynya**: a stretch of clear water amidst ice.

**Portolan**: an early modern marine navigational chart.

**Prosopopoeia**: a figure of speech in which an abstract thing is personified,
or a figure of speech in which an imagined, absent, or dead person or thing is
represented as speaking.

**Proxemics**: the branch of knowledge that deals with the amount of space that
people feel it necessary to set between themselves and others.

**Ptosis**: the drooping of a body part, especially the eyelids or the breasts.

## Q

**Quinzhee**: a shelter made by hollowing out a pile of settled snow (in
contrast to an igloo, which is piled snow blocks).

**Quintain**: a post set up as a mark in tilting with a lance, typically with a
sandbag attached that would swing round and strike an unsuccessful tilter.

## R

**Raki**: a strong alcoholic spirit made in eastern Europe or the Middle East.

**Rasgulla**: a dessert made by cooking a ball of paneer in syrup.

**Recaption**:: taking back, without legal process, property of one's own that
has been wrongfully taken or withheld.

**Rehoboam**: a wine bottle of about six times the standard size.

**Responsum**: a written reply by a rabbi or Talmudic scholar to an inquiry on
some matter of Jewish law.

**Riviere**: a necklace of gems that increase in size towards a large central
stone, typically consisting of more than one string.

**Roucoulement**: the gentle cooing of doves.

**Rowen**: a second growth of hay or grass in one season.

**Rubricate**: to add ornate capital letters (or other decorations) to a
manuscript.

**Rupestrian**: (of art) done on rock or cave walls.

**Rupography**: the art of making impressions on wax with coins or medals.

## S

**Sabkha**: area of coastal flats subject to periodic flooding and evaporation
which result in the accumulation of aeolian clays, evaporites, and salts, found
in North Africa and Arabia.

**Saltern**: a type of clay hut used to produce salt from seawater.

**Sambal**: hot relish made with vegetables or fruit and spices.

**Samskara**: a purificatory ceremony or rite marking a major event in one's
life. (From "samsara", which is the act of making perfect.)

**Sandhi**: the process whereby the form of a word changes as a result of its
position in an utterance (e.g. the change from a to an before a vowel).

**Sangha**: the Buddhist monastic order, including monks, nuns, and novices.

**Sastrugi**: dune-like structures of fine snow that form in rows parallel to
the prevailing wind direction.

**Satisfice**: decide on and pursue a course of action that will satisfy the
minimum requirements necessary to achieve a particular goal.

**Sautoir**: a long necklace consisting of a fine gold chain and typically set
with jewels.

**Saz**: a long-necked stringed instrument of the lute family, originating in
the Ottoman Empire.

**Scaramouche**: a boastful but cowardly person.

**Schappe**: fabric or yarn made from waste silk.

**Sciolist**: a person to pretends to be knowledgeable about something.

**Scissel**: the metal that's left over after forms have been stamped out.

**Scutage**: money paid by a vassal to his lord in lieu of military service.

**Sedilia (sing. sedile)**: a group of stone seats for clergy in the south
chancel wall of a church, usually three in number and often canopied and
decorated.

**Seif**: a sand dune in the form of a long, narrow ridge.

**Serac**: a pinnacle or ridge of ice on the surface of a glacier.

**Sesquipedalian**: an adjective meaning a word with many syllables, or a piece
of writing that uses many long words. It comes from Horace, who used the phrase
"sesquipedalia verba" (words which are a foot and a half long).

**Shabti**: each of a set of wooden, stone, or faience figurines, in the form of
mummies, placed in an ancient Egyptian tomb to do any work that the dead person
might be called upon to do in the afterlife.

**Shadoof**: a pole with a bucket and counterpoise used especially in Egypt for
raising water.

**Shakudo**: a Japanese alloy of cooper and gold, typically having a blue
patina.

**Sherwani**: a knee-length coat buttoning to the neck, worn by men from the
Indian subcontinent.

**Shura**: the principle of consultation, in particular as applied to government
(Islamic).

**Skeuomorph**: a derivative object that retains ornamental design cues to a
structure that was necessary in the original. Examples include fake woodgrain on
plastic, or digital "dials" in computer interfaces.

**Sniggle**: fish for eels by pushing a baited hook into holes in which they are
hiding.

**Socage**: a feudal tenure of land involving payment of rent or other
non-military service to a superior.

**Solifluction**: he gradual movement of wet soil or other material down a
slope, especially where frozen subsoil acts as a barrier to the percolation of
water.

**Soteriology**: theology dealing with salvation.

**Spallation**: a process in which fragments of material (spall) are ejected
from a body due to impact or stress.

**Spelter**: a solder or other alloy in which zinc is the main component
(similar to pewter).

**Spruit**: a small watercourse, typically dry except during the rainy season.

**Steeve**: a derrick consisting of a long pole with a block at the end.

**Strappado**: a form of torture in which the victim is tied to a pulley, raised
into the air, then dropped, only to be halted with an abrupt jerk.

**Strigil**: an instrument with a curved blade used to scrape sweat and dirt
from the skin after a sauna or exercise.

**Stumpwork**: a style of embroidery where the stitched figures are raised from
the surface of the work to form a 3-dimensional effect.

**Sudd**: an area of floating vegetation in the Nile delta, thick enough to
impede navigation.

**Sugan**: a straw rope.

**Sutler**: a person who followed an army and sold provisions to the soldiers.

**Synastry**: comparison between the horoscopes of two or more people in order
to determine their likely compatibility and relationship.

**Syncope**: omitting portions from the middle of a word.

## T

**Talik**: an area of unfrozen ground surrounded by permafrost.

**Tallith**: a fringed shawl traditionally worn by Jewish men at prayer.

**Tarboosh**: a man's cap similar to a fez, typically of red felt with a tassel
at the top.

**Tarlatan**: a thin, open-weave muslin fabric, used for stiffening ball
dresses.

**Tekke**: a monastery of dervishes, especially in Ottoman Turkey.

**Tepui**: table-like mountains found only in the Guiana highlands of South
America. These tend to be isolated entities rather than ranges, which makes them
the host of a unique array of endemic plant and animal species.

**Teraphim**: small images or cult objects used as domestic deities or oracles
by ancient Semitic peoples.

**Tessera**: a small square of stone or glass used to make a mosaic.

**Testudo**: a wheeled screen with an arched roof, used to protect besieging
troops.

**Theodicy**: the branch of theology concerned with explaining why a just and
loving god can be all-powerful and all-knowing yet permit terrifying evil and
painful suffering.

**Theomachy**: a war or struggle against God or among or against the gods.

**Therianthropic**: combining the form of an animal with that of a man.

**Thigmotropism**: the turning or bending of a plant or other organism in
response to a touch stimulus.

**Thimblerig**: a game involving sleight of hand, in which three inverted
thimbles or cups are moved about, contestants having to spot which is the one
with a pea or other object underneath.

**Thixotropic**: a consistency that is gel-like at rest, but fluid when
agitated.

**Thwaite**: a piece of wild land cleared or reclaimed for cultivation (usually
used as part of a place name).

**Tignon**: a piece of cloth worn as a turban headdress by Creole women from
Louisiana.

**Tirtha**: literally a crossing place or ford, refers to any place, text or
person that is holy.

**Tontine**: an annuity shared by subscribers to a loan or common fund, the
shares increasing as subscribers die until the last survivor enjoys the whole
income.

**Trabeation**: the use of beams in architectural construction, rather than
arches or vaulting.

**Triblet**: a cylindrical rod used for forging nuts, rings, tubes, and other
rounded metallic objects.

**Trunnion**: a pin or pivot forming one of a pair on which something is
supported; a supporting cylindrical projection on each side of a cannon or
mortar.

**Tsuba**: a Japanese sword guard, typically elaborately decorated and made of
iron or leather.

**Tsundoku**: buying books and not reading them; letting books pile up unread on
shelves.

**Tupiq**: a hut or tent made of animal skins used by Inuits in the Canadian
Arctic as a summer dwelling.

**Turbary**: the legal right to cut turf or peat for fuel on common ground or on
another person's ground.

**Tychism**: the doctrine that account must be taken of the element of chance in
reasoning or explanation of the universe.

## U

**Umiak**: an Eskimo open boat made of wood and skin, traditionally rowed by
women.

**Umma**: the whole community of Muslims bound together by ties of religion.

## V

**Varve**: a pair of thin layers of clay and silt of contrasting colour and
texture which represent the deposit of a single year (summer and winter) in a
lake. Such layers can be measured to determine the chronology of glacial
sediments.

**Vastation**: the purification of someone or something by the destruction of
evil qualities or elements; spiritual purgation.

**Velarium**: a large awning used in ancient Rome to shelter an amphitheatre
from the weather, or inner ceiling used to improve acoustics in a theatre.

**Velleity**: a wish or inclination which is not strong enough to lead one to
take action.

**Voussoir**: a wedge-shaped or tapered stone used to construct an arch.

## W

**Wabi**: a quality of austere and serene beauty expressing a mood of spiritual
solitude recognized in Zen Buddhist philosophy.

**Waragi**: a strong drink made from bananas or cassava.

**Whanau**: NZ an extended family or community of related families who live
together in the same area.

**Whitesmith**: a person who makes articles out of metal, especially tin.

**Wittol**: a man who knows of and tolerates his wife's infidelity.

**Woonerf**: a road in which devices for reducing or slowing the flow of traffic
have been installed.

**Wrot**: timber with one or more surfaces planed smooth.

## X

**Xantolo**: a Mexican tradition in which deceased loved ones are celebrated and
honoured through their re-enactment.

**Xeriscaping**: landscaping that conserves, or doesn't require much, water.

## Y

**Yakhchal**: an ancient type of evaporative cooler. Above ground, the structure
has a domed shape, but has a subterranean storage space. It is often used to
store ice, but sometimes to store food as well.

**Yandy**: separate (grass seed or a mineral) from the surrounding refuse by
shaking it in a special shallow dish.

## Z
