---
title: Cherne
template: page
fiction: true
---

<ol id="toc"></ol>

<div class="centered">
  <a href="./terrain.png"><img src="./terrain.png" width="80%" /></a>
</div>

<section markdown="1">

## Introduction

Consider Cherne. A diamond adrift in the heavens, Cherne measures eight
thousand gallops (about twelve thousand kilometers) from North Pole to South,
and six thousand from East Pole to West. Its single major continent, also
called Cherne, is surrounded on all sides by a great freshwater Ocean, whose
outer shore, the Worldrim, rises up to hold that sweet speck of life in the
Infinite as a child might hold a drop of water in her hand.

### The Pilot Angels

Chernese history begins with the Pilot Angels. It nearly ended with them as
well. Powerful, inscrutable, and seemingly immortal, the Angels were as far
beyond humanity as humanity is beyond cattle. No one knows whether they made
the world, found it, or just reshaped it to their needs.

The Pilot Angels' reign collapsed in a long, bloody struggle called the
Disputation. Over the course of three centuries the sun was knocked off course,
the moon was scarred by fire and set spinning, Lake Karaband was turned into a
sea of glass, and nightmares were given flesh and appetite.

When the Disputation ended fifteen hundred years ago, the Pilot Angels were
gone, leaving humanity to pick up the pieces as best it could. The first five
centuries after the Disputation's end are now known as the Age of Heroes, or as
the Age of Lamentation. One after another, powerful men and women used magic
left over from Pilot times to carve empires out of the chaos. Most of these
died with their founders, but a few became the seeds of modern Cherne's major
states.

After the tumult of the Age of Heroes came a period of relative stasis. History
became a largely regional matter: the Pale Remainder held sway in the north, the
Regimental Kingdoms squabbled with each other in the west, and Thind dominated
the southeast, while the Darpani bred horses and composed epic poetry on
Cherne's great central plain. New ideas were rare, and spread slowly if at all.
Most people lived and died as their grandparents had, knowing little and caring
less about anything more than a few days' walk from home.

Modern historians refer to that period as the Age of the Same, to contrast them
with the explosion of change in the past three centuries. The Pale Remainder
has been overthrown, Thind has been eclipsed by the Twin Admiralcies of Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang, and Balanced missionaries are spreading faith and new
learning from Araña to Uws. Trade and travel have become commonplace: apple
farmers in Ensworth wear Bantangui silk scarves at weddings, and half the royal
guard in Coriandel are the younger sons of minor Vaardian aristocrats. It may
not be the "New Age of Heroes" that some poets have proclaimed, but it is a
vibrant, dynamic time, full of vigor and possibility.

### Magic

Magic works in Cherne, but always exacts a price. A spell to open locks might
cost a magician a finger; one to understand a foreign language might erase her
memories of her mother, or render her incapable of tying knots. Lady Kembe, the
most powerful magician in present-day Cherne, can speak with people thousands of
gallops away, but has not left her house in two hundred years. Magicians are
careful about the bargains they make, but even so, the more powerful they
become, the less they are able to do with that power. (This is why the world is
ruled by kings, who are not so constrained.)

Exactly how a spell's price is paid varies widely. If someone who has given up
tying knots tries to do so, for example, she will be interrupted, drop the
string, or forget what she was trying to do. Most magicians try to keep their
spells' prices secret, since each restraint or limitation can potentially be
turned against them.

In theory, anyone can work magic. In practice, a great deal of native talent is
needed to do it well—even more than is needed to sing or understand complex
mathematics. Depending on locale, one person in five hundred will know a few
small spells for healing and mending; of those, one in ten will be good enough
to pursue magic seriously.

Many magicians describe the essence of their craft as "negotiating with the
Infinite". Some, such as the grass throwers of Darp, believe this is actually
what they are doing—for them, magic is something done on the magician's behalf
by unseen spirits, who demand payment in return. Others believe that magic is a
matter of cause and effect: the connection between the two may be too indirect
for human beings to trace, but that doesn't mean it isn't real. A third school
of thought, popular in Ruuda and the Twin Admiralcies, is that magic is a matter
of willpower. Just as Cherne's creator or creators willed the world into being,
so too do magicians remake reality through sheer force of will. Believers in
this theory tend also to believe that magic's price is simply a consequence of
magicians doubting their own power.

For centuries, most magicians only passed on their secrets to a few chosen
apprentices. That began to change with the foundation of the Society for
Inoffensive Conversation in Ossisswe in YS 1005. Led by Lady Kembe and others,
Society members began cataloging spells systematically. Their work gave
Ossisswe and the other city-states of the Karaband a decisive advantage in their
struggle to free themselves from Thindi hegemony (YS 1050-1100) and subsequently
to resist assimilation by the Twin Admiralcies (YS 1140-50 and 1165-71). Since
the invention of the printing press in Seyferte in the early 1100s, the
Society's model has been imitated in northern and central Cherne, although
mystery and secrecy are still the norm in the east, the south, and Darp.

The one kind of magic open to anyone is the blood oath. If someone willingly
sheds a few drops of their own blood while swearing an oath, the oath may become
binding (it happens roughly one time in ten). The person affected feels the
oath as an urge, or an itch, that steadily increases until the oath is
fulfilled. As there is no way for an observer to tell if an oath has "taken" or
not, most courts don't recognize them.

Not even death cancels a blood oath: most of the world's ghosts are people who
swore something impossible which they are still trying hopelessly to fulfil.
Despite this, or perhaps because of it, blood oaths are a central part of many
cultures' marriage ceremonies.

### The Gifted

For reasons that no one understands, some animals in Cherne are intelligent, and
able to speak. The Gift appears at random, though it is more common in some
species (such as apes, bears, and large cats) than in others (such as cattle and
snakes). The Gift is most common among cetaceans: un-Gifted dolphins and whales
are as rare as mentally challenged human beings.

An animal whose parents are Gifted has a better chance of being Gifted itself
than one whose parents are not, but all attempts to breed the Gift true have
failed. For the most part, the Gifted themselves are not concerned by this:
with a few exceptions (mostly among primates), Gifted animals are completely at
home among their un-Gifted kin.

The condition of the Gifted in human society varies widely. In Ini Bantang and
Barra Bantang, they have the same rights as people (though they cannot belong to
the four noble castes). In neighboring Thind, on the other hand, people believe
that re-incarnation as a Gifted animal is punishment for sins in a previous life
(which is a morally convenient justification for enslaving them). Gifted
animals in Darp may not own property, but frequently become judges because of
their lack of clan ties. Their legal and social status in the Regimental
Kingdoms, Araña, Praczedt, and Uws varies, but they usually work as bodyguards,
tutors, or entertainers, almost always in "partnership" with a human.

And then there is Ruuda. Many Gifted animals had no qualms about working for
the Pale Remainder; since their flesh and blood couldn't be used to keep the
Remainder "alive", they were never required to pay the flesh-tithe. As a
result, most Ruudians viewed the Gifted as spies and collaborators.

After the Fifth Rebellion, those Gifted who did not flee into the Herd of Trees
were massacred. Today, more than a century later, Gifted animals are still not
allowed into Ruuda without special dispensation from the Empty Throne, and even
then, local authorities often turn a blind eye when they are harassed or
attacked.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Geography

### The Ocean

The Chernese continent is surrounded by the great freshwater Ocean, which
generally flows clockwise. A stick of wood dropped into the sea off Ruuda may
reappear a decade later; barring storms, pirates, and monsters, a ship can make
the journey in as little as two years. This steady current shapes trade
patterns worldwide: Ruudian furs and Uwsian wheat to Praczedt, Praczny iron to
Thind and Bantang, Bantangui spices to the Regimental Kingdoms, and wool and
apple cider from there to Ruuda.

### The Worldrim

If Cherne is a plate, the Worldrim is its lip. These dark basalt mountains are
between twenty and thirty gallops high along the world's four walls. In most
places, they drop steeply into the ocean. At the north and south poles,
however, they flatten out to form Upuliaq and Ini Bantang respectively. The
Worldrim is only ten gallops high at the poles, and as low as three or four in
isolated places. The few adventurers who have explored these passes have
reported nothing on the far side except steep cliffs falling into an endless
empty void.

The one habitable spot on the Worldrim is in the southeast. The Staircase was
formed when millions of tons of rock were blasted out of the Worldrim during the
Disputation, leaving a long, narrow shelf. Some time later, villagers began
terracing that shelf to grow crops. Chocolate was first cultivated here in the
Age of Heroes, making the land a regular destination for trading fleets and
pirates. Thind held sway from YS 600-1050; after a period of squabbling
independence, the Staircase was absorbed by the Twin Admiralcies in the early
1200s.

The lower cliffs of the Worldrim are home to millions of seabirds, and a few
predatory lizards and mammals, but little else can find purchase there. Higher
up, frost and ice cover the rock, forming a blinding white strip two gallops
high. Above that, the air is too thin for even the hardiest clouds, and the
mountains are dark, sterile, and sharp-edged.

The best-known denizen of the Worldrim is the clockwise petrel. After summering
at the north pole, this black-and-white seabird flies along the Worldrim to
winter at the east pole. When spring comes, it continues its journey around the
world, spending its next summer at the south pole, and its next winter in the
west. There are two great flocks of these birds, each of which spends its
existence on the opposite side of the world from the other. In Darpani legend,
one flock is entirely male, the other female, and their endless chase is the
result of an ancient curse. In reality, they're just birds, and not
particularly intelligent ones at that.

### Upuliaq

North of continental Cherne, the Ocean is dotted with small, windswept islands.
This archipelago thickens as it approaches the Worldrim, eventually becoming the
rocky land of Upuliaq. The Worldrim is almost four hundred gallops from the
shore in central Upuliaq. The land between it and the ocean is initially flat,
becoming hilly and then mountainous as one travels north.

Near the pole, Upuliaq is permanently frozen. Glaciers and barren snowfields
form an almost impassable barrier. Closer to the coast, the brief summer
sustains beds of moss and hardy wildflowers. The great herds of caribou and
woolly rhinos that graze on these are prey to snow tigers and rock trolls (a
kind of hairy carnivorous ape). Offshore, penguins, seals, and sea hogs feed on
salmon, halibut, and shrimp, and in turn are fed on by orca and polar bears.
Dolphins are rarely seen in the cold northern ocean, but whales—primarily gray,
bowhead, and beluga—are common. So too is the porpin, a large relative of the
penguin which leads a completely seagoing life, whose whorled beak is valued
throughout Cherne as an aphrodisiac.

### Northern Cherne

Cherne's northern coast is a hard land, but a beautiful one. Fjords make deep
inroads into the taiga; brown bears and cougars hunt deer, goats, and the salmon
that return to the region's countless rivers and streams every spring. Near
Cape Grind, winter lasts from Malachite to Peridot, and the brief spring and
summer are just long enough for farmers to bring in a crop of barley and some
turnips. The climate is milder in Vaarda to the southeast, but even there, most
villages expect to be snowed in for at least a few weeks every winter.

The Helada Mountains form this region's southern border. Worn and rounded, they
are pockmarked by hundreds of small valleys, many of which are inhabited by
descendents of the Gifted animals that fled Ruuda after the liberation. Despite
this (or perhaps because of it), hundreds of Ruudian trappers descend upon the
mountains every year in search of beaver, lynx, blue rabbit, and more exotic
pelts.

Horses are uncommon in the north. Their place is taken by the hardy mountain
camel, a pony-sized creature with a small hump, a foul disposition, and an
almost limitless tolerance for hardship. They can be ridden, but are more often
used as pack and draft animals.

A quartet of fast-flowing rivers called the Four Sisters run from the Heladas
north into the ocean. From west to east, they are the Kalastava, the Kypsyva,
the Kuumineva, and the Potteleva. (A fifth river called the Saarumeva used to
lie between the Kalastava and the Kypsyva, but when Plangent was overwhelmed by
the sea in YS 966, the aftershocks opened a chasm in the mountains that
swallowed up the river.) These rivers are too rough for anything except canoes
along most of their length, but are nevertheless the highways on which salmon
and timber move.

The northernmost extremity of Cherne is Cape Grind, which is pummeled by gales
from Malachite to Heliodor. A parliament of whales gathers in these rough
waters every ten years or so to sing, play, mate, and debate. Enormous schools
of fish are attracted to the slicks of mucous and oil the whales leave on the
surface each time they breach; these in turn draw tens of thousands of seabirds,
until the sea and the sky alike seem to have come alive.

### The Sibor Plain

The Sibor Plain lies between the Heladas and the northern arm of the Brumosos.
Sheltered from the cold arctic wind, it is noticeably warmer than the north
coast: winter may cover the land with a blanket of snow, but summer is long,
green, and humid.

The plain's geography is defined by Lake Sibor, and the rivers that feed and
drain it. The rich alluvial soil around these waterways is extremely fertile,
although often marshy. Farmers have reclaimed much of this land with dikes and
drainage ditches over the centuries; maintaining these as a protection against
flooding is a constant chore.

At its western end, the plain gives way to rolling hills, which then fall into
the Ocean. This evergreen rainforest, called the Herd of Trees, is the largest
wooded area north of the Inequator, and is sentient in some way that humanity
can only partly comprehend. (One sign of this lack of comprehension is the
never-ending argument over whether the Herd has one mind, or many—mystics who
have spent their lives among the trees sometimes refer to it one way, and
sometimes the other, often in the same sentence.) Fir, pine, and cedar stretch
for hundreds of gallops, thinking slow thoughts and sheltering bears, raccoons,
beavers, and troops of forest trolls. These small apes, similar in size and
temperament to baboons, are relatives of the northern trolls of Upuliaq. Many
are born Gifted, and devote their lives to keeping the Herd free from human
beings.

Lake Sibor is fed by the Smirvoriye and Povriye rivers which drain south from
the Heladas, and by the Tangrapriye, which drains north from the Brumosos. The
Zhugariye runs (or more accurately strolls) southeast into the Gulf of Szigorú.
Further north lies the smaller, and rougher, Kravriye. Since the locks at
Kudetsny were rebuilt in YS 1045-60, shallow-bottomed river boats can travel
from the mouth of the Zhugariye to the the foothills of the Heladas. Tubbier
camel-drawn *roykas* fill the river as soon as the ice breaks, each followed by
its own flock of half-tame ducks.

### The Northern Brumosos

The northern arm of the Brumoso range lies between the low-lying Sibor Plain to
the north, and the High Plains of Darp to the south. The evergreen forest of
the Herd of Trees blends into a mix of conifers and deciduous trees: alder,
poplar, and larch stand side by side. The wildlife also changes, as goats,
deer, wild sheep, rabbuck (a large, long-legged rabbit), and the hairy mountain
rhino become more common. The main predators are solitary cougars and prides of
short, powerfully-muscled cave lions. Red-beaked eagles, which occasionally
hunt in groups, have been known to attack solitary human travellers.

One other indigenous creature of note is the eldermouse. Every four or five
years, eldermice build small, dense nests of twigs and mud, crawl into them, and
close up the entrance. A few weeks later, newly-winged bats emerge. After
gorging themselves on insects, frogs, and whatever else they can catch, these
bats indulge in a frenzy of mating. Once their offspring (all mice again) have
been born, the surviving bats fly west until they fall exhausted into the ocean
to drown.

Many of Cherne's clouds spend their winters in the northern Brumosos, grazing on
ice and snow among the mountain peaks. In the spring, the herds migrate west to
Plangentia, or south to Barra Bantang, where they join with others from the
central and southern mountains in bringing monsoon rains to Thind. Their only
natural predators are the lightnings that dwell among Cherne's highest peaks.

The region east of Ensworth in the Brumosos' foothills is called the Blight.
The Pilot Angels used the great, still lake in its center as a dumping ground
for used and wasted magic. Since their fall, that magic has seeped out into the
lands around the lake. Time runs differently in the Blight, and the land itself
is warped: it can be winter and summer in a week, and there are places where
rain falls up and the wind turns flesh into salt. The Death of Dogs came out of
the Blight, as have many monsters. Despite this, treasure hunters and
desperados still venture into it. Occasionally, a few even return, with tall
tales, strange devices, and creatures found nowhere else on Cherne.

### The Gulf of Plangentia

The Gulf of Plangentia was formed in YS 966, when several great caverns beneath
the coastal kingdom of Plangent caved in, dropping the kingdom into the sea.
Between fifty and three hundred strides deep, this broad, flat shelf is one of
the world's richest fishing grounds. Dolphins and whales feed on herring, cod,
smake, flounder, and squid, as do giant eels that can reach 50 strides in
length.

### The Angels' Fall

The Brumoso and Cansado Mountains were once connected along the west coast. The
great caverns underneath these mountains collapsed at some time in the distant
past, creating a jagged landscape of deep canyons, knife-edged plateaus, and
roaring waterfalls. Narrow flows of dense, shadowed forest separate the open
alpine grasslands of the plateaus; a lake might be a hundred strides wide,
twenty gallops long, and a full gallop deep.

Mounted travel in the Angels' Fall is difficult or impossible (which is the main
reason the Darpani have never invaded the Regimental Kingdoms). People travel
on foot, by water, or by air if they can.

### Plangentia and the Cansados

Plangentia consists of the Regimental Kingdoms and the Cansado Mountains.
The Regimental Kingdoms lie between the high central plain of Cherne and the
western arm of the Ocean, and are separated from Araña by the Cansados (which
other Chernese regard as pretentious hills, rather than proper mountains). The
land is cool and damp in the north; fog often blankets the coast, and winter is
one long downpour. Moving south, the land becomes drier and sunnier, until one
reaches the eucalyptus forests of the Cap di Perçalle and the western Cansados.

The wildlife of Plangentia is just as varied as its climate. The north is
dominated by the same species as the Herd of Trees: brown bears, raccoons,
beavers, deer, a few elk, and a flightless duck called a naffy that will eat
anything it can get down its throat. In the south, tigers and black bears are
the main predators, while bison and southern rabbucks (longer-legged than their
northern cousins) are the main prey. Depending on locale, the crops range from
turnips to olives. The great orchards of Ensworth produce as much cider as the
rest of Cherne put together, while every garden in Seyferte and Leyselle
produces at least a little garlic.

The Cansado mountains drain southwestward through the Soire and Vir rivers.
Smaller and gentler than their northern cousins, they are lined with fertile
farmland. Rafts, barges, and small boats are common sights, as are fish and
freshwater squid (which are pan-fried and served with garlic and rosemary). To
the west, the small islands off Cap Beq are the last land until the Worldrim.
Further south, Cap di Perçalle marks the border between land that is merely
difficult, and land that is mostly impossible. Storms that wander inland from
the Harshem can pick up salt, sand, frogs, and even the occasional crocodile,
and drop them on long-suffering farmers in Araña's southernmost provinces.

### The High Plains

The High Plains, more commonly called Darp, are the single largest region of
Cherne. The Black Grass country in the north, and the Green Grass in the
center, are well watered, particularly along the meandering course of the Wise
River. This land supports great herds of bison, horses, and camels. In the
southeast, the storms that pour through the Shogindur Gap nurture a baobab
savanna called the Dry Tree country. These gave way in the west to the
red-brown soil and scattered piñons of the Brown Brush, where long droughts are
common, and in the south to the Karaband Desert.

The northern Darpani winter can be surprisingly harsh. The temperature
routinely falls below freezing in winter, though snow rarely falls. In the
summer, grassfires will often flash across hundreds of square gallops, leaving
fertile ash behind to spur the next generation of growth. Alder and cottonwood
grow on the banks of the many small streams and rivers that criss-cross northern
Darp, but are rare in the south. Red- and blue-eared teosinte (a wild variety
of corn) brings splashes of color to the land in late summer and fall.

### The Central Brumosos

The central Brumoso Mountains separate Darp from the coast of the Gulf of
Szigorú to the east. Tall and sharp-edged where they join their northern
cousins, they gradually become gentler as they approach Barra Bantang. Bears,
eagles, vultures, and cave lions feed on goats, rabbucks, and the treaver, a
short-tailed cousin of the beaver that builds nests of mud and twigs among the
branches of ash, oak, and cottonwood trees.

As they approach Barra Bantang, the central Brumosos flatten out into a wide
pass called the Shogindur Gap before rising once again to form the range's
southern arm. The Gap provides access between Darp and Thind; it has been used
for raiding and invasion almost as often as for trade, in both directions.
Storms from the Yr frequently sweep up into the Gap, bringing lightning,
thunder, and flash floods. (The word "gindur" means "thunder" in Thindi.)

### The Yr

The eastern arm of the Ocean is called the Yr. Circulation is primarily north
to south, with a clockwise counter-current: cold water runs south along the
Worldrim, while a warm current returns north around the Sullair Islands. Whales
and dolphins are common in its cold northern reaches, but rarely venture within
three hundred leagues of the Sullair Islands. Enormous social jellyfish called
sea clouds, which sometimes cover several square gallops, provide a precarious
haven for a few tiny seabirds. These live off the sea moss that grows on the
jellyfish, while carrion sharks circle endlessly, snatching up fish that the
jellyfish's stings have only partially paralyzed.

The Sullair Islands are named after the dragon Sulk, who has roosted there since
the end of the Disputation. (The name "Sullair" is a contraction of "Sulk's
Lair".) One hundred twenty strides long, with a two hundred stride wingspan, she
is intelligent, a powerful magician, and practically invincible; her presence
and diet have shaped the entire east coast of Cherne.

The larger island, Sullair Major, is home only to a few scattered villages, and
to herds of free-roaming rhinos that make up most of her diet. When they are
not tending to these rhinos, Sullair Major's human inhabitants fish, smuggle,
and try to stay out of the dragon's way.

Sulk's nest is on Sullair Minor, the smaller island to the southeast, where she
has tended to her three chicks since they hatched in YS 240-41. ("When the
dragonets fly" is a poetic way of saying "the end of the world" in most Chernese
languages.) Human beings are not allowed near Sullair Minor: Sulk destroys any
ship or magician that approaches.

### The Gulf of Szigorú {#the-gulf-of}

The Gulf of Szigorú lies north of the Inequator, between the Central Brumosos
and the Yr. The area was the scene of the Disputation's fiercest battles, and
their scars are still visible. The most prominent is Mount Narjemczy, Cherne's
only volcano. Further south lies Hrstil Canyon (called "Arusettirn Canyon" in
Thindi). A gallop deep, five gallops wide, and a hundred and seventy gallops
long, it marks a failed attempt by some faction of Pilot Angels to break the
world in two.

The land around the Gulf of Szigorú has cool, snowy winters and hot, humid
summers. The wildlife is as strange as the land itself. Elk, gaurs (a wild
cattle that resist domestication) and winged pigs are preyed upon by chameleon
bears, hundred-legged snakes, griffins, carnivorous willow trees, and the
walktapus, a ground-dwelling ape whose hairless head has eight tentacles and a
parrot-like beak. Even stranger things sometimes crawl into Hrstil Canyon from
caverns deep underground; many of these are clearly one-of-a-kind sports, but a
few, like the winged rattlesnakes called *csorgos*, are part of some
unguessed-of subterranean ecosystem.

The only rivers of note in Praczedt are the Nettelin (which forms the historical
border with Uws), the Evacsza, and the Srust. All three are too narrow and fast
for commercial shipping.

### The Karaband Desert

The Karaband is a hundred thousand square gallops of dry, inhospitable land.
The region was once a rich savanna, but when Lake Karaband was turned into the
Sea of Glass, the land around it became desiccated. Today, the Karaband is
rocky in the west, north, and east, and sandy in the center and south. Water is
scarce on the surface, although lakes and rivers can be found in caverns
underground. The only exception is the River Az, which brings water from the
north end of the Shogindur Gap a silty, salty swamp on the Sea of Glass's
northeastern border.

Despite its apparent harshness, the Karaband is home to a wide variety of small
creatures, including lizards, snakes, rabbits, mice, pangolins, and armadillos.
Mushroom-shaped anthills, some shoulder-high, mark the paths of underground
watercourses; the larger are often home to palm-sized scorpions called
vinegaroons, whose sting is an effective (if painful) antidote for many poisons.
Overhead, vultures, tumblecrows, and gargoyles (a winged ape-like scavenger)
circle patiently, waiting for anything edible to succumb to exhaustion or
dehydration.

The largest creature in the Karaband is the desert crocodile, sometimes called a
sand dragon (though not by anyone who has ever seen Sulk). Adult males can be
three strides long, and will wait half-submerged in the sand near a spring or
pool for days before striking. Sand misers also pose a threat to travelers:
these toad-like animals project images of cool water, succulent greenery, and
the like into the minds of passers-by in order to lure them into the pits they
have dug in the sand.

The Sea of Glass has its own unique ecology. Pools underneath the glass are
replenished by seepage from the Az Swamp. Long strands of greenery reach out
from the reservoir created where it soaks into the stone beneath the glass; on
the surface, there is frequently a crust of salt. The clusters of desert
oysters cling to the glass next to these little pools are preyed upon by tawny
gulls, which drop stones on them to break their shells.

Travelers from elsewhere, however, are most likely to remember the tornier, a
shell-less tortoise that wedges itself into a crack in the rocks and inflates
its body in order to stop predators from pulling it out. Nothing else quite
captures the stubbornness of the Karaband's inhabitants.

### The Harshem

The southwestern arm of the Ocean is called the Harshem. Its storms are famous
all over Cherne: in moments, the sky can darken, and the wind go from a brisk
breeze to a howling gale. Bantangui fishermen routinely brave these erratic
conditions in search of ship-sized basking squid, which they often hunt in
co-operation with gray and bowhead whales.

The most unique creature in this part of the world is the hive crab. As its
name suggests, this species lives communally: a single shell-less female hidden
in a burrow in the coral does nothing but lay eggs, which her non-breeding
siblings tend. Each hive sports a different color scheme; warriors can be as
much as half a stride in diameter, and their powerful left claws can take off a
hand or a foot in a single snip.

### The Harshem Coast

The Harshem Coast lies between the Karaband and the ocean. It begins in the
southeast, where the jungle of Bantang becomes a vast salt marsh, home to little
more than mosquitoes, lungfish, and crocodiles. Moving north, it is rocky and
desolate: there are no rivers or streams, and only a few brackish springs. The
land grudgingly puts forth a little greenery as it turns into southern Araña,
but for the most part, it is the Harshem that has suffered most from the
destruction of Lake Karaband.

### The Southern Brumosos

The southern Brumoso Mountains form the central spine of Barra Bantang, the long
peninsula that reaches down from the Chernese mainland toward the South Pole.
At their northern end, near the Shogindur Gap, the Brumosos' peaks are almost
five gallops above sea level, falling in stages into the rich plains of Thind.
Further south, the mountains rise almost directly out of the Yr to the east,
though their western slopes descend more gently toward the Harshem.

The wild pigs and mountain rhinos that dominate the mountainous cloudforest are
hunted by tigers, hanguars (a small cat with a monkey-like appearance), and army
crabs. The mountains are most famous for their bird life, including a thousand
different species of hummingbird, glass-winged darts, tattooed macaws, and the
fiercely territorial piranhakeet.

### Thind

Thind's eastern and western borders are the Brumoso Mountains and the Yr. Its
northern and southern are not so clearly defined, but are usually taken to be
the Kerasulas River in the south, and Hrstil Canyon in the north. Its heart is
the Undja River, the "Blood of Thind". Rising in the Brumosos, the Undja
irrigates over a hundred thousand square gallops of exceptionally fertile
farmland; only the Sibor Plain can compare. Its upper reaches are swathed in
jungle and punctuated with waterfalls; the lower Undja flows slowly and
patiently through gallop after gallop of rice paddies and carp pens, making the
monsoon rains that descend upon the region between Citrine and Chalcedony feel
almost redundant.

Most of Thind is heavily farmed; hippos are used as draft animals, and
occasionally slaughtered for meat, though most dietary protein comes from
chicken and fish. Wildlife ranges from a variety of harmless and harmful
snakes, through mongooses and civets, to gaurs and tigers. Of these, only some
of the snakes, and the tigers, are a threat to human beings. Diseases, such as
malaria and chagas, and parasites like nailworms and lung-dwelling mushrooms,
are a more serious problem, especially for outsiders.

When poets are feeling generous, they call Thind the "Bride of the Rivers" to
acknowledge that the Sarpang (in the north) and Kerasulas (in the south) are
also major waterways. Lying on the de facto border between Thind and the
Admiralcies, the Kerasulas in particular is as commercially important as the
Undja, though it is also frequently the scene of ill-tempered skirmishes as the
neighboring powers vie for control.

### Ini Bantang and Barra Bantang

Barra Bantang is the long southern peninsula that separates the Yr from the
Harshem; Ini Bantang includes the islands near its southern extreme, and the
jumbled land near the south pole. Most of the peninsula is covered in jungle:
banyan, bamboo, mangrove, and teak mingle with a wide variety of fruit trees,
epiphytes, ferns, and other species. Tigers, leopards, crocodiles, and banana
trolls (squat apes with bone-crushing jaws) are the principal predators; muntjac
(barking deer), wild hippos, dwarf rhinos, and tapirs are their prey. The
jungle porcupine, which camouflages itself by snagging leaves and loose branches
on its quills, is normally left alone (even by crocodiles), but some banana
trolls have learned to flip them over on their backs with sticks.

Honey bears were once common in the mountains of Barra Bantang, but have been
hunted to near-extinction for their tongues and livers, which are used in
longevity spells. Domesticated elephants are used for hauling logs and other
engineering tasks; normally placid, they can run amok if they see or smell of
crocodiles, and often put their pummeled remains up in the branches of trees.

Ini Bantang is cooler and less humid. In fact, many people believe it has the
best climate in all Cherne. Its wildlife is similar to the peninsula's, but not
identical: tigers are less common, but leopards and black bears take their
place. Similarly, while dwarf rhinos and porcupines are frequently found,
hippos are almost unknown; a large beaver called the absang fills its role
instead.

In the alpine highlands approaching the South Pole, the southern jungle gives
way to a drier, colder climate. The southern highlands are much less forbidding
than their northern counterparts: the thinness of the air, rather than the
temperature, is the greatest barrier to exploration. Cut off from the rest of
Cherne, these high valleys are home to marmots and other small mammals, and to a
wide variety of predatory birds.

The southern polar region is also home to the last of Cherne's giants. No more
than five thousand survive in modern times, partly because of their low birth
rate, but also because their inability to work magic puts them at a disadvantage
compared to their smaller, faster cousins. Ochre-skinned and hairless, adult
giants stand five strides tall, and are as stocky as rhinos. A few venture into
the rest of Cherne, but so rarely that many Uwsians and Ruudians believe them to
be mythical or extinct. (After completing his epic statue "Chong Il Wrestling
With a Great Eel" for the King of Leyselle, the Uwsian sculptor Bohdan
Jermijasviy was very surprised to receive a complaint about the pattern on Chong
Il's kilt from the giant's very-much-alive great-granddaughter.)

### The Underworld

Most paintings of Cherne show something with the proportions of a plank table.
In fact, the world's dimensions are closer to those of a piece of fine leather:
eight thousand gallops from north to south, and six thousand from east to west,
but no more than a hundred gallops thick.

Much of that thickness is empty space. One cavern, beneath Praczedt, is a
hundred and twelve gallop across, and two and a half gallops from floor to
ceiling. It connects to dozens of others, which in turn connect to dozens more.
A handful of texts that survived the Disputation describe these caverns as
"holds", although what they were holding, and where it has gone, has been
forgotten. Popular stories fill these caverns with monsters, lost kingdoms, and
fabulous treasure—all of which exist, but are less common than storytellers
would like to believe.

One creature which definitely does exist is a cave fish called a corpse lamp.
The fish itself is a bony white color, but its blood and bile glow yellow-green.
Natural philosophers speculate that this is to warn other corpse lamps of
danger, but this ignores the fact that the fish are blind.

### Cosmology

Like people everywhere, the Chernese speculate about the stars. Are they tiny
moons, spinning so fast that they appear to twinkle? Clouds flying high above
the air? Or are they the suns of other worlds, for whose inhabitants Cherne's
sun is just another sparkle in the night sky?  No-one knows, and none of the
magicians who have gone looking have ever returned.

The moon, on the other hand, has been visited at least half a dozen times since
the Disputation, when the spell that destroyed Sulk's mate blasted the life from
its surface and set it spinning. Diamond-shaped like Cherne, the moon now
tumbles about its long axis every nineteen and a half days. Its motion churns
the little air that still clings to it into a permanent storm, which batters the
ruins of the Pilot Angels' lunar palaces relentlessly.

Most of the stars above Cherne are wanderers. Of those that are fixed, the most
important is Diwei, the Western Star that sailors steer by, and Maowei, which
stands almost exactly in the center of the sky.

### Summary

- Upuliaq: Tundra near the coast; brutally cold mountains moving north.

- North Coast: Taiga blending into mixed coniferous/deciduous forest in the
    east, and temperate rainforest in the west (the Herd of Trees). Helada
    Mountains are alpine.

- Sibor Plain: Mixed configerous/deciduous forest mixed with temperate marsh and
    peat bog.

- Gulf of Plangentia: Temperate rainforest in the north (the Herd of Trees),
    becoming mixed coniferous/deciduous forest, chaparral near Cap Beq, and
    savanna in Araña.

- Brumoso Mountains: Alpine along their length. Northern and eastern slopes are
    wetter than southern and eastern.

- High Plains: Short-grass steppe (the Black Grass) in the north; tall-grass
    prairie (the Green Grass) in the center; savanna (Dry Tree) and scrub (Brown
    Bush) in the south.

- Karaband and Harshem Coast: Stony, sandy, or salty desert.

- Gulf of Szigorú: Deciduous forest.

- Thind: Tropical dry forest (thorny eucalyptus is common), dense rainforest,
    and tropical marshland. Much of the natural biome has been replaced by
    intensive agriculture.

- Ini Bantang and Barra Bantang: The peninsula is rainforest in the north, with
    mangroves, banyan, and bamboo, giving way gradually to chaparral in the
    south. The southern mountains are alpine.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Society

### The North

#### Upuliaq

The word "Upuliaq" is a Ruudian mangling of an Ulaq phrase meaning, "Where the
people make camp." The Ulaq are a nomadic people, who are unique among the
Chernese in practicing spirit-based magic. Instead of trading parts of
themselves for power, Ulaq shamans "wrestle" with their ancestors in order to
heal the sick, foretell the weather, or drive seals onto the beach. These
shamans bind their own spirits to their bones, so that their descendents can
call upon them after their death.

Silver and furs brought Ruudian traders to Upuliaq in the early 1100s; disease,
alcohol, and soldiers followed. The native Ulaq were nearly destroyed, but then
a mysterious figure called the Wrestler taught himself Chernese magic and the
art of war. Between YS 1220 and 1225, the Wrestler led a series of ever-bolder
hit-and-run attacks, first against isolated trading posts, then against Ruudian
army outposts, and finally against the town of Ax Medicine. Today, the Ruudians
hold only a few isolated islands off the Upuliaq coast, though they have not yet
conceded that their first attempt at empire has failed.

The only town of any size is Ax Medicine. Originally a trading post, it was the
Ruudian army's principal stronghold until its capture in YS 1225. It now has a
winter population of roughly five hundred (mostly Ulaq smiths and carpenters),
but quadruples in size during the short summer trading season.

#### Ruuda

Ruuda occupies most of the northern coast. Its people suffered under the rule
of undead body-snatchers known as the Pale Remainder, who controlled the north
from YS 478-1100. Once the Remainder were destroyed, the various rebel groups
briefly fought with each other. By 1120, an uneasy compromise between several
of the strongest factions emerged. This "Empty Throne" now governs Ruuda and
its neighbor Vaarda, which was annexed in YS 1146. It works as a non-elective
parliamentary system: any group with enough muscle to persuade existing members
that it ought to be given a seat gets one.

For the past thirty years, the Empty Throne has been dominated by the Pure
Light, who were the most fanatical opponents of the Pale Remainder during the
war for independence. Pure Light traditions have become a secular religion in
much of Ruuda. Each morning, at dawn, people gather in groups to greet the sun
(and prove that they are not undead in disguise). A few adherents of Pure Light
doctrines have attempted to spread their beliefs to other parts of Cherne, with
little success. Others occasionally mount attacks (clandestine or otherwise) on
Bell Prison, a continent away, in an attempt to eradicate the last of the Pale
Remainder.

Ruuda's main cities are Jalkelainen (on the Kalastava), the capital
Ruuda-in-Ruuda (which lies on the Kypsyva), and Pohjoinen (on the Potteleva).
Jalkelainen and Pohjoinen are each home to roughly thirty thousand people.
Ruuda-in-Ruuda is twice their size: it well-protected harbor is home to a large
fishing fleet, as well as hundreds of merchant vessels. Like its people, its
buildings are tall, strong, disdainful of adornment, and handsome rather than
beautiful.

Blazon: a 12-rayed sun, gold, on a white background, with red half-diamonds at
the four poles symbolizing the blood of those who fell in the struggle for
freedom.

#### Vaarda

Vaarda is southeast of Ruuda. Its people rebelled against the Pale Remainder at
the same time as the Ruudians, but independently. Vaarda was a separate kingdom
from 1100 to 1146, when Ortimer, the grandnephew of its first king Haakon,
"invited" Ruuda to annex it. Seventy five years later, Vaardians still sing
songs about those forty-six years...but quietly.

The city of Etela may no longer be Vaarda's capital, but with forty-five
thousand people, it still dominates Cherne's northeastern tip. The city lies
next to a grove of giant pine trees. Several hundred people live in their
branches, growing crops in thick beds of moss and making snide remarks about the
"ants" who dwell in the city below.

Blazon: a pine tree on a white background, with a brown half-diamond to the
south. Unused since annexation.

#### Uws

Uws occupies the broad, fertile Sibor Plain between the northern Brumosos and
the Helada Mountains. It is named after one of the last great conquerers of the
Age of Heroes, who died fighting the Pale Remainder in YS 483. Since then, this
part of Cherne has been occupied by a succession of major and minor kingdoms,
each gobbling up its neighbors before fracturing into pieces in its turn. Only
two dynasties—the Szarkosys in YS 713-933, and the Barsadovs from 1017 to the
present—have been able to impose their rule over the entire region. Szarkosy
rule was absolute, second only to that of the kings of Thind in its brutal,
eccentric efficiency. The Barsadovs have (so far) been more reasonable,
primarily because the Oath of Sovereignty does not allow them to raise taxes
without the consent of the Doum (the nobles' parliament).

Uws's major cities are built on the banks of Lake Sibor and its tributaries,
which are the nation's main thoroughfares. The south shore of Lake Sibor is
reinforced with the Long Dike, a 200-gallop wall of earth thirty strides high
that is slowly being extended along the length of the Sibor River.

Uwsian peasant grow wheat for their masters, but eat potatoes themselves. Many
houses in the marshy land where Lake Sibor feeds into the Vrostny are built on
stilts, and it is common to see peasants stilting their way through flooded
fields in the spring.

The trackless expanse of the Herd of Trees looms large in Uwsian folklore;
people born near the forest have a reputation for strange powers and beliefs.
Trading with the Herd's forest trolls is strictly forbidden, and punishment is
both swift and harsh. Despite this, most villages in Bessiya province
(bordering the Herd) find some accommodation or another with their neighbors—a
bowl of milk left out overnight, for example, can prevent a farmer's chickens
from being plucked in the middle of the night.

Uws's major cities are Kudetsny (at the western end of Lake Sibor), Vnir (at its
eastern end), and Nevy Rav (where the Zhugariye reaches the ocean). All three
are bustling ports, and surrounded by sturdy stone walls. Kudetsny and Vnir are
each home to roughly forty thousand people, though that number nearly doubles if
the small farming towns that keep them fed are included. Nevy Rav, which is
built on the ruins of an older city razed by the hero Uws, has about one hundred
twenty thousand people, including a large minority of Praczny, and several
thousand Vaardians who keep themselves busy with plots and dreams. Sarudetsny,
which lies at the junction of the Lesser and Greater Tangrapriyas, has roughly
fifty thousand people; Polgotseny, in the south, is only slightly smaller.

Blazon: the Barsadov blazon is quartered silver over blue, a sword in the
southeast, a crown in the northwest. The Szarkosy blazon, now disused,
presented a winged bear on a vertical divide of blue and silver.

#### The Herd of Trees

The Herd of Trees is a sentient forest covering several thousand square gallops
at the western end of the Sibor Plain, between the Helada Mountains and the
northern Brumosos. Roads do not survive long in the Herd, nor those who make
them. The only permanent human settlements are on islands in the middle of
lakes, but their inhabitants are careful not to anger the pines and firs that
watch over them.

A few magicians (most notably, Eduardo of Porandine) have managed to win the
trees' trust, or at least their tolerance. It is clear from their descriptions
that the Herd thinks (or think—it isn't clear whether the trees constitute one
mind or many) very differently from humanity and Gifted animals. However, the
Herd does (do?) know how to play go: every twenty or thirty years, it (they?)
exchange a move with the dragon Sulk through a human messenger.

### The West

#### The Regimental Kingdoms

The Regimental Kingdoms lie in Plangentia, between the southwestern arm of the
Brumosos and the ocean. Each of the region's peoples trace their origins back
to one of the human armies that the heroes Ealx and Heot led west in YS 302.
During the Age of the Same, these became nine independent kingdoms. Today there
are seven: Plangent was swallowed by the sea in YS 966, and Fourette was
conquered by Seyferte and Leyselle in YS 985-6.

Seyferte and Leyselle are the largest kingdoms in modern times, and occupy the
rich farming land in western Cherne. Most of Cherne's wine comes from the north
and center of this region; further south, vines give way to olives. Aixeme,
which lies between them, devotes much of its energy to balance-of-power
diplomacy; of late, it has been accused (justly) of stirring up trouble in order
to check Seyferte's expansionist ambitions. After persuading the king of
Seyferte to build a replica of the royal palace of Leyselle as a madhouse, for
example, Aixeme's prime minister suggested to the Queen of Leyselle that she
build a public toilet on the same plan as the Seyfertois palace.

Inland, the farmers of Colway and Ensworth grow onions, barley, and apples;
their cider and wool are traded from one side of Cherne to the other.
Ensworth's famous University is the greatest gathering of learned minds in
Cherne. From grammar to government and history to husbandry, anything and
everything is debated in its halls and catalogued in its sprawling library. The
only subject that *isn't* on the curriculum is magic, though more than a few
magicians have studied there.

Despite the University (or perhaps because of it), Ensworth is a very
traditional kingdom. Each spring, for example, its senior noblemen gather in a
carefully-tended field next to the royal palace, strip to the waist, and pull an
ancient plow steered by the king. Some say the practice is the price of an
ancient spell that keeps the land fertile; others believe it started as a joke,
or a wager.

The northern maritime kingdoms of Bruyere and Derway are smaller than their five
neighbors, but have extensive fishing and trading fleets. With Ruuda becoming
steadily more puritanical, more and more Bruyenes and Derwers are putting a
little extra silver in their pockets by smuggling brandy, chilis, and other
proscribed goods around Cape Grind.

All seven kingdoms are monarchies. In Leyselle, Seyferte, Bruyere, and
Ensworth, kings and queens are nominally absolute, though in practice, all are
responsible to a "staff" made up of senior nobles, representatives of merchant
houses, and mayors of major cities. Colway's Sad Dukes, and Derway's Princes,
are much more "firsts among equals". Royalty elsewhere may look down on them
for raising their own pigs, or commanding their own fishing fleet, but they are
famously indifferent, and their people famously loyal.

Aixeme is the most democratic of the Regimental Kingdoms: its queens speak first
and last at any gathering, but have little power beyond that. Anyone with eight
years of military service can vote to choose one of the two seigns who will
represent their regiment in the Parledoux in Aix. Seignurial candidates must be
sponsored by nobility in the officer class, but once elected to the Parledoux,
seigns have a long history of voting as they wish.

Seyferte-in-Seyferte is the seat of royal power; the great bridge across the
Wise upstream from the city is the largest feat of human engineering since the
end of the Age of Heroes. The Leysellois city Verudin, located at the mouth of
the Wise River, is four times larger than the national capitol Selle, and ten
times as loud. Its sculptors, painters, and gardeners are leading a brilliant
revival in the arts.

Ensworth's capital is Ensworth (population sixty thousand), but its major port
is Fidditch (forty-five thousand). Across the river lies its Seyfertois twin,
Fideche, which is only slightly smaller. Seyferte's other major cities are
Verudin, Yvesse, and Seyferte-in-Seyferte (which, with almost two hundred
thousand people, is the largest city west of Thind). Leyselle's are Marnei,
Vigroble, and the capital, Ginelle (one hundred and ten thousand), while
Aixeme's only major city is Aix. All of these cities were founded between YS
302 and YS 340, and follow a similar plan: a walled Old City with parade grounds
at each of the major gates, surrounded by a sprawl of boulevards, thoroughfares,
and alleys, some paved with cobblestones, the rest with hard-packed earth.

Further north, the capital of Derway is Sarck; Colway's is Nampton, and
Bruyere's is Bruyere. Sarck has roughly twenty-five thousand rain-soaked
inhabitants; Nampton and Bruyere have thirty thousand each.

Blazons: Ensworth is a griffin rampant before five upward half-diamonds in green
on a white field. Colwayis a belt and boots, brown, and a crown, bronze, on
white. Derway is quartered white over gold, an upraised hand to the southeast,
an ax to the northwest. Bruyere uses a dolphin between four gold coins on blue,
while Seyferte is three eagles facing right, the center eagle having a white
crest, on green. Leyselle displays an hourglass on its side before a sword,
both black, on gold, and Aixeme, a single eagle facing right before a field of
silver stars, on green.

#### Araña {#section}

Araña, which lies south of the Regimental Kingdoms, is distinct both
historically and culturally from its neighbors. Physically, the Aranese are
smaller and lighter than their northern neighbors. Their language is related to
Darpani, although the relation is not close. Eastern Araña is a sparsely treed
and sparsely populated savanna; the west is wetter and more fertile.

Aranese society's concern with spiritual matters reached its peak in the
writings and teachings of Saint Juan di Perçalle (YS 944-1031), who founded the
non-theistic religion called the Balance. Most Aranese spend a few months in a
Balanced reflectory before marrying, and return for a year or more after their
children are grown. Balanced reflectants, male and female, are a common sight,
and provide most of the region's governance. Those who achieve balance are
referred to as saints elsewhere in Cherne, and are treasured (or, in Ruuda,
regarded with suspicion). As the Balance spreads, Aranese is becoming the
language of diplomacy throughout most of Cherne, though scholars are still more
likely to write in Enswer, and Ruudians and Thindi still insist on doing
business in their own tongues.

Araña is nominally ruled by a duke, but in practice, power lies in the hands of
the abbots and abbesses of the major reflectories. The largest of these, at
Cuayaçir, was founded in 1051 by Filipe di Moyeyo, who devoted his life to
translating di Perçalle's writings into Seyfertois, Enswer, and Praczny. Over
ten thousand reflectants live, work, and study there in preparation for
missionary work all across Cherne.

Araña's capital is Nuaçevir (pop. fifty thousand), although Cuayaçedil is now
almost as large once the reflectants are included.

Blazon: Araña's is gold, on a diamond, green, the surround blue, representing
the world. By royal dispensation, the reflectory at Cuayaçir uses the same
blazon with a goldsmith's scale superimposed.

### The Center

#### Darp

The Darpani horse tribes have dominated central Cherne for almost a thousand
years. Even Janbinder the Great, founder of Thind, never conquered them;
despite several campaigns, the best he could do was push them north of the River
Wise. In the half-century following his death in 299, the Darpani reclaimed all
of the land they had lost, and more. Since then, they have twice invaded Thind,
and occasionally raided the Regimental Kingdoms to the west.

The Darpani care little for gold, measuring wealth in horses and poetry instead.
They are divided into a dozen major regional tribes and two dozen smaller ones.
Clan ties cut across tribal boundaries: the Arrow Eagle clan, for example, makes
up a quarter of the Horse Skull tribe, and roughly a fifth of each of the
neighboring Black Sun, Five Hands, and Run Laughing tribes. Most young men
marry into a tribe other than the one they were born in, but both men and women
inherit their mother's clan affiliation, which they retain for life. They also
hang on to their marriage boots, which have embroidered soles to show that they
aren't for everyday use. If a woman wants to divorce a man, all she needs to do
is smear dirt (or something worse) on the boots and leave them in a public
place.

Tribes are governed by chiefs, but the post is not hereditary. Instead, when a
previous chief wishes to resign, or loses the confidence of the tribe, each clan
puts forward one or more candidates. These then set challenges for one another;
the person who does best in the tribe's estimation becomes chief. "Challenge
parties", consisting of several candidates alternately cooperating and competing
with each other to complete a quest, are a staple of Darpani folklore.

The Darpani have guarded their way of life jealously for centuries. No building
is allowed to be taller than a man on horseback, and no-one may own more metal
than they can carry unaided. Anyone who breaks these rules, Darpani or foreign,
is driven off the plains, or killed. Such practices give the Darpani a
reputation for brutality elsewhere in Cherne, but inter-tribal warfare is almost
unknown, and learned Darpani find steady employment in Plangentia and the
Karaband as adjudicators.

The only places in Darp where tribal law is not enforced are Burning Rock and
the Ghost Fog Valley. Burning Rock is a fortress dating from the Age of Heroes,
which takes its name from the flame-red stone it is made from. Outlaws are safe
within its walls, though men have been known to camp outside the fortress's
great gates for years waiting for someone who has wronged them to emerge.
Traders from the Regimental Kingdoms, Uws, Praczedt, and occasionally Thind use
it as a staging post and for warehousing.

The Ghost Fog Valley, which lies at the geographical center of Cherne, is a much
stranger place. People can step into one another's dreams there, or wash their
faces in starlight, or be torn to pieces by their own shadows. Ealx and Heot,
the founders of the Regimental Kingdoms, led their troops through the valley in
YS 302 in order to throw the hero Uws off their trail; two hundred years later,
a young Darpani walked into the valley with a club foot, and walked out with a
voice that enabled him to conquer Thind. Today, the Black Sun tribe guard the
only entrance to the valley jealously. Every year, one or two warriors or grass
throwers are allowed to enter the valley; the few who survive return with
prophetic visions, and the power to move through the earth like fish through
water.

Blazon: every person of note has a three-part banner, showing tribe, clan, and
individual. For example, the grand chief Dog Snow Running's banner bore a horse
skull, an eagle with an arrow in its talons, and four rings; his granddaughter,
No Fast Laughing, used a horse skull, a folded blanket, and an eye shedding
tears.

#### The Karaband

Civilized life in the Karaband revolves around its oases. Several of these have
been abandoned to haunts and monsters as wells close to the Sea of Glass have
dried up. The three largest that remain are the centers of the city-states of
Ossisswe, Coriandel, and Armaq.

Ossisswe is sometimes called the City of a Thousand Magicians, although only a
few hundred actually live there. While people talk of them governing the city,
the reality is more complex: long-lived magicians, such as Lady Kembe, fund and
occasionally direct Ossisswe's guardsmen and tax collectors more or less as an
afterthought in order to ensure peace and quiet.

The city's main export is dayglass, which its citizens mine from the ruins of a
Pilot palace that sunk into the ground at the war's end. This magical glass can
absorb sunlight during the day, and radiate it later in the dark. A thumb-sized
piece capable of casting as much light as a candle for an entire night costs a
day's wages in Ossisswe, or two weeks' worth in Ruuda. Larger pieces have
other, stranger properties, which draw magicians to Ossisswe like ants to honey.

Coriandel is smaller than Ossisswe, but lies where the overland spice and
chocolate route between the southern coast and the Regimental Kingdoms meets the
cattle trail to Darp. Every year, the Darpani tribes drive their herds down
from the great plains to Coriandel. The month-long fair is the biggest
gathering of rogues, spies, and wishful thinkers in the world. The Coriandi
smile, take their cut, and heave a sigh of relief when everyone leaves.

Coriandel's government is the most efficient and honest in Cherne. This is
because the Royal Collar of Coriandel, an artefact left over from Pilot times,
never lets its wearers forget their obligations, or act without considering the
consequences. Oddly enough, no-one else on Cherne has tried very hard to
replicate the spell...

Armaq was Coriandel's principal rival for several centuries. The struggle
between the two came to a head in YS 1198, when Coriandel's army defeated
Armaq's, then laid siege to Armaq itself. A quarter of a century later, fewer
than ten thousand people live in Armaq, and its once-famous market has little
more to offer than tough-skinned melons and scavenged artworks.

There is also the Lost City of Zie. Before the Disputation, it stood at the
mouth of the River Az; since Lake Karaband was turned to glass, it has been
swallowed up by the swamp. There is still treasure there, but many ghosts as
well, and some of the less pleasant creatures let loose during the Disputation
now make it their home.

Meanwhile, deep in the desert, a neverending sandstorm rages back and forth
across the dunes. At its heart lies the Caravan of the Damned, led by the
cursed Emir Zaihudi of Ossisswe. He and his followers have been wandering in
circles for nine hundred years, their numbers occasionally increased by unwary
travelers who accept their hospitality, or by rogues desperate or foolhardy
enough to try to steal the treasures the Emir himself stole from Ossisswe's
first magicians.

Blazons: Ossisswe is a lantern, gold and black, on sand, and Coriandel, crossed
spears on a divide, blue to the north, sand to the south.

#### The Harshem Coast

The rest of Cherne would ignore the desolate Harshem Coast if it weren't for the
fact that it is the world's only source of diamonds, and home to its richest
gold mines. Miners use a variety of ingenious devices, both magical and
mechanical, to extract water from the ground, the air, or each other to sustain
themselves in this harsh land.

The only settlement of any size is a small village called Bell Prison, which is
run by a handful of Pale Remainder who escaped from Ruuda in YS 1100. Raiding
parties from the prison are as great a threat to the gold and diamond miners as
the heat. For the past century, the prison's rule has been simple: anyone who
digs up their own weight in gold in a single day is free to leave. So far, no
one has survived long enough to find out whether the undead would keep their
word.

### The East

#### Praczedt

Praczedt was unified in YS 330-454 under the hero Harpad Praczedneteny, a
one-time student of the dragon Sulk who died in Mount Narjemczy's first
eruption. Uws conquered northern Praczedt in the late 700s, but withdraw in the
900s after the Szarkosy dynasty collapsed. In contrast, while Thind has claimed
sovereignty over southern Praczedt since Harpad's death, it has never exerted
any real control: the badlands around the Hrstil Canyon are a formidable barrier
to conventional armies.

Modern Praczedt is a complex mosaic of free cities, small baronies, and
non-territorial power blocs like the Conciliatory Merchants and Aunt Dardi's
Home for Orphans (which is not above creating orphans when it needs to recruit
new members). What little wealth the region has comes primarily from mining and
manufacturing: Praczny steel is the best in Cherne, and Praczedt's silversmiths
are rivalled only by those of Araña. Many of the romantic novels the Ruudians
are so fond of are set in Praczedt, which actually does have more than its share
of lost heirs, star-crossed lovers, and magicians disguised as pigherds.

The only city of note in Praczedt is Anyalcze. Home to between twenty and forty
thousand people, depending on the politics of the day, it is dominated by the
walls and turrets of Anyalcze Castle, which spans the Evacsza River. Further up
the river lie a series of abandoned palaces dating from Pilot Times, which are
used as makeshift fortresses by bandits when they are not infested with
monsters.

Blazons: too many to count. Harpad Praczedneteny used an oak tree growing on a
cloud; both elements are common in Praczny blazons today.

#### The Sullair Islands

Depending on whose story you prefer, Sulk and her mate were created, found, or
brought to Cherne soon after the Disputation began. They fought on several
sides, until Sulk's mate was destroyed by the same spell that scarred the moon.
After taking her revenge on the few Pilot Angels who were not also slain by the
spell, Sulk retreated to the islands of Sullair Major and Sullair Minor. She
has played only a small part in the world's affairs since, although she
tolerates no incursions into her territory.

Most Sullaireans are therefore subsistence farmers living in small villages.
Their capital, Yrabek, would only qualify as a minor port elsewhere in Cherne.
Surprisingly, few choose to leave the islands—as far as they can tell, being
ruled by a dragon isn't that different in practice from the deal everyone else
gets.

Due to their long proximity to Sulk, or a fluke of genetics, or for some other
reason entirely, Sullaireans are much more likely to have a flair for magic than
other Chernese. Every family has at least one member who has traded away a few
nonessential parts of his or her life for the ability to create small illusions,
or cure the splays (a particularly unpleasant intestinal disease that afflicts
young rhinos). As with being ruled by a dragon, most Sullaireans shrug this off
as not being particularly noteworthy.

#### The *Nemeszy* and the Staircase {#the-and-the-staircase}

Hundreds of *nemeszy*, or "raft-island villages", circle endlessly in the Yr.
Each is home to anywhere from a few dozen to a few hundred people (also called
*nemeszy*). Their language and customs are unknown elsewhere, although some
scholars find tantalizing similarities with the Hett. Their inhabitants spend
most of their lives on their rafts, drinking rainwater, farming floating beds of
kelp, and staying out of the way of Bantangui slavers.

Starting around YS 200, some *nemeszy* gave up the sea and began settling the
great scar in the Worldwall called the Staircase. Most of the crops they grew
came from Thind and Barra Bantang, but one native crop, chocolate, soon eclipsed
them. Three hundred years later, their terraced fields were rich enough to
attract the attention of the Thind's emperors, who were then at the height of
their power. After a century of divide and conquer, Thind formally annexed the
Staircase in YS 600.

Thindi rule survived the chaos that followed Arruhab VI's attempt to invade
Sullair in YS 877, but decayed slowly thereafter. By YS 1050, the Staircase's
military governers were effectively independent warlords. Never ones to miss an
opportunity, the Twin Admiralcies began playing the same game of divide and
conquer that the Thindi had played six centuries previously. One by one, the
warlords were bribed, drugged, assassinated, or married off. Today, only a few
retain any real independence, although the pomp and splendor of their courts is
still enough to put Thind itself to shame.

### The South

#### Thind

For the first four hundred years after the Age of Heroes, the Empire of Thind
was the major power in southern Cherne. Its strength lay in the rice paddies of
the Undja, rather than in the harbors and islands of the south and southwest.
Generations of Thindi emperors built grand palaces out of polished coral and
magical glass, fought ritualized battles over trifles, and gave the world the
arch, polyphonic music, and the compass (which in Cherne, always points toward
the Ghost Fog Valley at the center of the world).

Thind was conquered twice during the Age of the Same, both times by horse tribes
from Darp. Properly speaking, the first invasion (YS 508-581) belongs to the
Age of Heroes, since the nameless Darpani chief who led it was almost certainly
possessed by the spirit of his tribe's long-dead founder. Sharapanni, the city
from which he ruled, was abandoned after his death; gem-encrusted bones from its
strange dungeons occasionally wash down the Kerasulas, but the city itself
remains magically hidden.

In contrast, the second invasion (YS 878-94) was opportunistic: most of the
Thindi army was eaten, burned alive, or transformed into statues during Arruhab
VI's lunatic attempt to invade Sullair. As with the first invasion, the Darpani
were quickly absorbed into Thindi society; families still consider themselves
Original, Former, or Latter Thindi, but except for a few Yearagain Eve rituals,
their lives are indistinguishable.

Climate change caused by the slow spread of the Karaband eventually led to
Thind's decline. As southern Darp dried out, the seasonal rise and fall of
Thind's great rivers was replaced by an irregular alternation of drought and
flooding. In response, Thind's dynastic wars grew bloodier and bloodier. In
the most infamous incident, in YS 919, Pilot magic was used to drive the Sarpang
River in southern Thind out of its bed to wash the city of Chauhary away. The
chaos that followed gave the Twin Admiralcies their first opportunity to extend
their reach north of Barra Bantang; after being beaten back in YS 977-80, they
returned in the mid-1000s, and now effectively control Thind's three
southernmost provinces.

Today, Thind is nominally ruled by the Mohedel dynasty from the Floating Palace
in Haricot, although the eight provinces not under Bantangui suzerainty are
effectively independent. The peasants grow rice, soya beans, lentils, and
especially chilis, which are dried and exported across Cherne. Most of the
upper classes are nominally Balanced; those who do not devote themselves to
endless intrigues over succession and privilege spend their time buying horses,
playing chess, or betting on a five-a-side form of wrestling called *kabbadi*.
The fixation on horses is an expensive leftover from the Darpani invasions:
horses do not breed well in the lowlands, so thousands are brought in from the
High Plains every spring to satisfy Thindi demand. (Poorer aristocrats breed
hippos instead, which their peasants use as draft animals.)

Even Thind's tax collectors can't keep track of how many villages and towns it
has. Major cities, all of which are home to more than two hundred thousand
people, include Diptanshu, Indrajir, Kushanu, Sir, Pudras, Andaresh, and
Hamzakar. Haricot (at the head of the Undja Delta) and Amprakash (where the
Sarpang flows into the Undja) have half a million and six hundred thousand
respectively, and are the two largest cities in Cherne. They are also often the
most squalid, particularly in the rainy season; plague and famine are common in
the damp warrens that lie between their opulent palaces.

Blazon: the imperial blazon is a red bar horizontal on gold, overlaid by a ring
of eight black stars. Each province has its own, as do the major cities.

#### The Twin Admiralcies

Southern Cherne is dominated by the Twin Admiralcies of Ini Bantang and Barra
Bantang. Unlike most Chernese nations, the Twin Admiralcies do not trace their
origins back to the Age of Heroes. Instead, they came into being between YS
800-1000, when a succession of charistmatic captains welded the raiding and
trading fleets of southernmost Cherne into a nation. Since that time, the Twin
Admiralcies' reach has extended into southern Thind and the Karaband Desert.
Their *praus* (single-masted ships) and *perahus* (larger, slower vessels with
two or three masts) sail to Leyselle every year, though they rarely venture any
further north. Bantangui plots and pirates are a staple of Chernese literature,
just as their silks and delicate coral jewellery are a staple of Chernese
fashion.

Upper-class Bantangui society is divided into four noble castes: Ban Ah, Ban
Iji, Ban Jeevan, and Niban Johel. Ban Ah are mystics and poets; Ban Iji, judges
and bureaucrats; Ban Jeevan (who tattoo wounds on their bodies for protection,
and cut notches in their ears to commemorate their victories) are warriors and
explorers; and Niban Johel, who often pass themselves off as belonging to some
other caste, are tricksters, thieves, and musicians. These divisions are not
enforced, but are instead as much a matter of personality as social function:
magicians and scholars can be found among all four castes. Together, the
nobility make up roughly a fifth of the population, and control shipping, trade,
government, and the military. (In fact, they make no distinction between them.)

Ban Ah choose fleet captains and admirals from the other three castes based on
merit, and on formal examination of their competence in navigation, trade, and
other disciplines. (Like the challenges the Darpani use to select chiefs, these
examinations are an echo of those the Pilot Angels used to select human
servants.) A shadowy Niban Johel organization called the Forty-First Fleet
balances the power of those Ban Ah select with acts of mischief and sabotage;
when it isn't busy with that, it also spies on the Twin Admiralcies' neighbors.

Farming, manufacturing, and other occupations are left to Parba Chol, the
"passenger classes" who are forbidden by law from owning or working a sea-going
vessel. Many Parba Chol live inland, "out of the smell of the sea", and have
little contact with their overlords except through the taxes they pay. A few
independent tribes still eke out an existence in the mountains of Barra Bantang;
most speak a hybrid of Vulgar Thindi and Bantangui, and have been enthusiastic
converts to the more militant strains of the Balance. They still observe their
own time-honored rituals, however—when an elderly man's wife dies, for example,
he will marry the earth, and children dress up in elephant-head costumes to
celebrate Yearagain Eve.

Rice is the major food crop, along with mangoes, plantains, and sugar cane.
Rubber is produced for shipboard use; export is forbidden by law, but smuggling
is ubiquitous. Slavery is widespread, as are magical practices that are frowned
on or illegal elsewhere.

The Twin Admiralcies do not have a capital; instead, the Great Fleet sails back
and forth along the length of Barra Bantang and among the islands of Ini
Bantang, stopping at each major city in turn. The ones in the east were all
founded by the Thindi, although only Yadanapore (which lies at the mouth of the
Kerusalas) belonged to the Empire after the end of the Age of Heroes. From
north to south, the others are Antharwaddy, Teberjaya, Pejangorian, and (nestled
against the mountains of the southernmost Worldrim) Yanaunchang. In the west,
Mau Sheleu, Mau Tinnemanthan, Mau Tikkim, and Mau Esan all began existence as
fortified trading posts. (The word "mau" means "beached ship".)

Blazon: a double sun on blue, the sign of the Twin Admiralcies, is almost always
used in conjunction with fleet blazons. These are geometric, rather than
figurative; the Twelfth Fleet Ascendant, for example, flies three black chevrons
on an orange background, while the Fourth Indomitable uses a red square inside a
gold one on blue.

### Other Peoples of Note

A few of Cherne's other inhabitants deserve mention.

#### The Brumoso Cloudherds

North of the Regimental Kingdoms, in the Brumoso Mountains, are several villages
that would be ignored by the rest of the world were it not for their
inhabitants' peculiar trade. The people of Marandine, Porandine, and their
neighbors are cloudherds. Every spring, the adults hike into the mountains and
round up as many clouds as they can find. They then drive these clouds south to
water farmers' fields in the west, southern Darp, and elsewhere. The most
adventurous take their clouds as far as Ruuda, Praczedt, and the Bantangui
lands, where they work as couriers, or carry passengers and cargo.

#### The Flying Mountain

Avaunt, the Flying Mountain, has flown through the skies above Cherne since the
beginning of recorded history. Seven gallops long, four gallops wide, and half
a gallop from base to peak, the mountain always follows the same course: eight
months north to Normous Berth, a two-week pause, and then eight months south to
Apcha Bantang, where it stays for another two weeks before turning north once
again.

In Pilot times, Avaunt was a place for sport and dalliance, where a good party
might last a human lifetime or more. After the Disputation, it became a refuge
for tinkers and scholars who had taken one side or another in the long war. The
nations over which the mountain flew called these people "Hett", and regarded
their dabblings in the magical and mechanical arts with growing suspicion.

Eventually, a renegade prince from Seyferte stormed the mountain with a rag-tag
mercenary army, and drove the Hett into the forest around Normous Berth. It was
Chrysoprase, the month when winter begins to dream of spring, and bitterly cold.
Few survived.

Four centuries and twenty-three captains later, the Avauntois descendents of
that army are a hardy, self-sufficient people. For eight months at a stretch,
they raise potatoes, beans, and goats. When the Flying Mountain comes to rest,
they transform its main town into a bustling marketplace. Cider and wool from
the north is traded for mahogany, pepper, and silk from the south. Cargos too
bulky for camels' backs, and too fragile or ephemeral to send by sea, are stored
in the old tunnels that honeycomb the mountain, to be unloaded and delivered at
the other end of Avaunt's endless journey.

#### Aphsi

When Lake Karaband was changed into a sea of glass, a handful of the people
living on its shores were caught in the spell's backwash. They acquired a sixth
sense called "droming", a form of empathy which allows them to sense the
emotions of other living things. Most Aphsi can drome whether someone is happy
or sad, just as normal people can smell what is cooking before they go into the
kitchen.

However, this extra sense has its drawbacks, too. Few Aphsi can kill anything
more self-aware than an insect without sharing its pain; simply walking through
a crowded market can make them dizzy, as they are overwhelmed by the emotions of
those around them. Those few Aphsi strong enough to live among others are
valued as truthsmellers or thieves, but never really trusted.

#### The Hett

Since being driven off Avaunt, the Hett have wandered from place to place, never
trusted, and never welcome. They are best smiths and tinkers in the world, but
their knack for making clever machines only increases the suspicion with which
others regard them. In the Regimental Kingdoms, for example, Hett are not
allowed to sleep within city limits, while Praczedt requires them to secure a
bond from a Praczny citizen before undertaking any work.

#### Underdwellers

Many small communities (sometimes just a few hermits, sometimes entire villages)
eke out a living in the great caverns beneath Cherne. The only "kingdom" of
note is called Saarumeva, after the river which was swallowed up by the Helada
Mountains in YS 966. Lying beneath the western Heladas, the kingdom was
originally created by the Pale Remainder; prisoners and slaves built whole
palaces for the undead by the shores of underground lakes, safely away from the
sun. Most were killed with dayglass weapons during the Fifth Rebellion, but
rumors persist that a few still lurk in the caves' furthest, darkest corners.
Saarumeva owes its existence today to its rich brass and bronze mines, and to
its fish farms.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Miscellaneous

### Angelic Remains

Even after fifteen hundred years, there are signs everywhere that Cherne once
belonged to the Pilot Angels. In southern Vaarda, for example, on the great
flat plain of the Kravriye River, two giant stone hands reach up toward the sky.
A hundred strides from wrist to fingertip, they show only a few signs of
weathering. Nothing grows on them, or in their shadow. No one knows if an
entire stone giant lies beneath them, or if not, what they were made to
represent.

Far to the south, the city of Ossisswe is built on top of a ruined palace
fashioned entirely from dayglass. Mining the glass, and fashioning it into
lamps, is the city's single largest industry. Other things occasionally turn up
in the ruins as well, like animate crystal tortoises, statues which are really
people or pets that have been frozen in time, and swords with quicksilver
blades. It is said that half of Ossisswe's magicians are there in search of
such wonders, and that the other half are there to prevent them from being
abused.

Coriandel also stands on top of a reminder of ancient days. Its Tombs may
originally have been fashioned by the Pilot Angels, but the graves and
mausoleums that give the great caverns their name actually date from the Age of
Heroes. The entrance to the Tombs is called the Moonlight Door, as it only
exists between the time the moon's leading edge clears the horizon, and the time
its trailing edge pulls free. Coriandi law states that being sent into the
Tombs is equivalent to a death sentence; those few who have survived the
experience have brought back wonders, or come back changed in unpredictable
ways.

### Time, Weight, and Measure

Years are generally counted from the end of the Disputation, and written "YS"
(meaning "Years Since"). By this reckoning, the present day is YS 1261,
although most serious scholars now believe it has actually been 1263 years since
the slaughter known as Sulk's Grief.

Two other calendars are worthy of note. The first is used in Ruuda, where years
are counted from the start of the final struggle against the Pale Remainder in
YS 1091. The second is used by the Hett, and by *nemeszy* in the Yr. Both
believe it is now the year 17704 Since Departure, although they no longer know
who departed, or where they went.

The days of the week are Redsday, Orangeday, Yellowsday, Greensday, Bluesday,
and Purplesday; Bluesday is traditionally market day, while Purplesday is a day
of rest. The months are Tourmaline (mid-winter), Sapphire, Chrysoprase,
Peridot, Heliodor, Citrine, Topaz (mid-summer), Carnelian, Chalcedony,
Malachite, Amethyst, and Chrysoryl. Each month is thirty days long; an
intercalendary day called Yearagain Eve is inserted between 30 Chrysoryl and 1
Tourmaline. This means that each month in the year starts on the same day of
the week, but the months in successive years start one day later.

Starting in YE 1031, the Chernese have added another intercalendary called
Lampwatcher's Eve at midsummer every forty years to correct the slowly-drifting
seasons. Some philosophers speculate that the spell that threw the sun off
course during the Disputation has also pushed it further from Cherne; others
believe it is a sign that the sun is getting old.

In contrast with this uniformity, every region has its own bewilderment of
weights and measures. In Ossisswe's Cripple Gate Market, weights are generally
measured in leaves (about ten grams), cakes (about three quarters of a
kilogram), and logs (eighty flounders for dry goods and soil, a hundred and
twenty for livestock). Lengths are measured in thumbs (a couple of centimeters)
and strides (about a meter), and distances in gallops (1200 strides). Many
other units are used for special purposes: flowers, for example, are weighed in
petals, not in leaves, while butchers weigh meat by the tongue. Cloth, rope,
plowed land, and the heights of masts all have specialized measures as well.

Similarly, every region has its own kind of money. (In fact, the Bantangui have
three: one used exclusively among Ban Ah, one which the other noble castes use
when dealing with each other, and a third which they use with the rest of the
world.) In Ossisswe, money is measured in pence and rings; there are six brass
pence in a quartering, and eight full rings (192 pence) in a silver bezel.
Silver generally trades for gold at twenty to one, although any time a
significant amount of money changes hands, it will be weighed and assayed.

### The Pale Remainder

At midnight on Yearagain Eve of YS 478, a dozen weather-beaten ships made
landfall on the north coast of Cherne. Their cargo was a clan of undead called
the Pale Remainder, who used the blood, bones, and flesh of the living to
maintain their unnatural existence. The spells that held them together were
woven from moonlight, and evaporated when exposed to the sun. Despite this
handicap, they were powerful magicians, and almost impossible to kill with
mundane weapons.

Within a decade, the Pale Remainder had conquered everything north of the Helada
Mountains. For the next six hundred years, they farmed the land's human
inhabitants like cattle. Four times a year, the Remainder collected a tithe of
body parts and blood—always, always blood. There were rebellions, of course,
but the Remainder put these down ruthlessly.

In the late 900s, renegade Ruudians living in the shadow of the Herd of Trees on
the northwest coast banded together to create an army of liberation. By the
mid-1000s, similar groups operating in the east, in what is now Vaarda, were
receiving covert support from Uws (newly reunified under the Barsadov dynasty)
and militant Balance factions in Praczedt.

On 8 Heliodor 1091, the crew of a ship in Jalkelainen harbor broke into its
hold, dragged Bokchang Tzen Urpatnati's coffin onto deck, wrapped it in chains,
and threw it into the ocean. That act sparked the Fifth Rebellion, which
succeeded. By 1100, those Remainder who hadn't been hacked to pieces had fled.
In the years since, hardline Ruudian factions like the Pure Light have tracked
the escapees down one by one. The only ones still "living" in the open are the
wardens of Bell Prison, a continent away from Ruuda in the barren coastal desert
of the Harshem.

### Faith and Philosophy

The people of Cherne are not religious, in the sense of believing in a god or
gods. However, many of them are spiritual. Most people believe in some form of
reincarnation, though the details vary. In the Regimental Kingdoms, for
example, most people believe that the souls of the dead lie fallow for a time,
during which they blend together, and that new souls grow out of this spiritual
compost. In contrast, the Bantangui believe that we must all live our lives
over and over again until we get them right, while in the Karaband, people say
that when you die, you have to tell the story of your life one last time, and
all that matters then is whether you enjoy hearing it yourself.

Darpani beliefs are more specific, and center around the Last Man. The Darpani
believe that if the secret name given to you at your birth is still a secret
when you die, you will be reborn. Over time, as people discover one another's
secret names, either by accident or as revenge for insults or crimes, the
world's population will dwindle, until only the Last Man will be left. When
that happens, the Creators will return to tell him what they thought they were
doing when they made the world.

#### The Balance

Spiritual concerns have always been pursued most intensively in Araña. This
tendency reached its climax in the work of Saint Juan di Perçalle (YS 944-1031),
whose teachings are the basis of the non-theistic religion called the Balance.
Di Perçalle explicitly stated that he knew nothing of the world's origins or
eventual fate, or of mankind's. Instead, he taught his students to strive for
balance in their lives: action and inaction, today's joy and tomorrow's pain,
acts for others and acts for the self—the Balanced soul weighs all of these
against each other in every moment.

Today, many Aranese devote their lives to meditation in an attempt to balance
themselves in the mundane world. Contrary to popular belief in other parts of
Cherne, their privations and mental exercises do not give them magical powers.
In fact, many of the Balanced seem to find magic amusing or distasteful,
believing that it binds people even more tightly to the world.

The Balance is neither warlike nor pacifist; both tendencies can be found among
its adherents. It is also not hierarchical, although most adherents will defer
to the abbot or abbess of Cuayaçir in questions of doctrine.

#### Sun "Worship" in Ruuda

The only other organized faith in Cherne would deny that it is a faith at all.
During the long centuries in which they struggled against the Pale Remainder,
the sun was the only trustworthy ally the people of Ruuda had. Over the
centuries, it became first a symbol, then an object of veneration. Today, for
example, most Ruudians believe that the souls of the righteous dead rise up to
join, become part of, or ride on the sun (opinions vary), so that they may watch
over the rest of us and ensure the eventual victory of good over evil. Each
dawn, they gather to "greet the sun", a ritual whose original purpose was to
ensure that no Pale Remainder spies were hiding among them.

The most dogmatic adherents of this proto-religion call themselves the Pure
Light. Members of this sect have been known to prove (or test) their faith by
staring at the sun until they go blind. Other Chernese find acts such as this
both baffling and frightening, and despite Ruudian protests to the contrary,
usually believe that it is some new kind of magic.

### The Sea of Glass

In Pilot times, Lake Karaband was a freshwater sea, two hundred and fifty
gallops from east to west, and a hundred and fifty from north to south. Watered
by the River Az, the rich savanna around it was home to zebras, elephants,
lions, and thousands of other creatures.

In the closing days of the Disputation, this great body of water was turned into
a single sheet of clear glass. On a beach on the lake's northern shore, a young
man standing waist-deep in the water, beckoning to his lover to come join him
for a swim, suddenly found that he couldn't move his legs; in the center, flying
fish were caught unawares mid-leap, and fell back to flap around and die in the
sun. Waves froze in place; fish, crocodiles, and whole ships were entombed.

Over the next four centuries the land around the Sea of Glass slowly became a
barren, rocky desert. The Az still flowed, but its junction with the Sea of
Glass became a silty, salty swamp. Most of the region's human inhabitants
starved, or joined the Darpani tribes to the north; the few who stayed found
ways to eke a living from the desert.

### The Death of Dogs

One of the most significant events in the Age of the Same was the Death of Dogs,
a plague that spread from the Blight beginning in the 1040s. The disease only
affected canines, but was invariably fatal. By the 1080s, dogs, wolves, foxes,
and coyotes were extinct in most of Cherne. By the 1110's, the disease had
reached the *nemeszy* in the Yr; twenty years later, the abbess of Saint Ear's
Retreat in Uws laid her beloved Aranese pug on his funeral pyre. Stubborn
magicians occasionally try to resurrect the species, but all attempts to date
have failed.

### Medicine

Medicine is almost exclusively a female profession in Cherne, just as war is
almost exclusively male. A few men have become doctors, but most people,
educated and otherwise, believe that only someone who can create life can
sustain it.

Antisepsis and anesthesia (using ether) are well understood and widely
practiced; folk remedies such as *ahatouc* (a gummy analgesic sap) are widely
available, and inoculation against smallpox has spread from Araña to most of
Cherne in the past fifty years.

However, most hospitals still demand insurance against the cost of a burial
before admitting a patient. Antibiotics are unknown: influenza, livermis, and
cholera can only be treated by magic, one patient at a time. Tuberculosis,
polio, and malaria are sadly common among the poor, and in war-torn regions.
Average lifespans therefore range from 45 (Thindi peasants) to 65 (Seyfertois
nobility), but a significant minority reach their 70s, and those with access to
magic can live for centuries.

### Technology

Society on Cherne is fundamentally agrarian: most people spend most of their
time growing crops, herding crops, or catching fish. Windmills and overshot
waterwheels provide power for mills and forges; the latter are often placed on
the windward sides of mountain peaks when water power is unavailable. Bamboo
painted inside and out is used for water pipes in Plangentia and the south; as a
result, the water in poor districts often tastes of rotting vegetation.

Horseshoes, stirrups, and horse collars are used everywhere that horses are
found. Wheelbarrows, lye and ash soap, paper, the horizontal loom, percussions
drilling, and fermentation are almost universal as well; the only region of
Cherne where they have not been in constant use since the Disputation is
Upuliaq, but even there, they have been introduced by the Ruudians in the last
century.

One fact that shapes Chernese technology is that metals do not occur in ores,
but rather in nearly-pure veins. These may be hair-thin, or as thick as the
trunk of a tree. Mining is therefore done either by breaking the stone away
from the metal, or by heating the stone (often in place) until the metal
liquefies.

The most common means of transportation is walking. The well-to-do ride horses
in Darp, Uws, Plangentia, and Thind, or camels in Ruuda and the Karaband.
Cloth-roofed sedan chairs carried by two or four men are common in cities
everywhere; porters typically wear a pewter badge in the shape of a boot, and
have back and hernia problems by the time they're thirty.

Shipbuilding is well developed in every coastal region except the eastern
seaboard. The Bantangui build fast single-masted *praus* and larger, slower
*perahus* for piracy and trade. The fishing boats and galleons built in the
Regimental Kingdoms, Ruuda, and Uws are not as nimble, but much sturdier. The
Darpani build rafts when they need them, particularly to move bulky trade goods
down the Wise. The Ulaq, on the other hand, practically live in their sealskin
kayaks for several months every year. They rarely venture out of sight of land,
but frequently make journeys of a hundred gallops or more along the coast.
Thanks to Sulk, the Praczny are not a seagoing people; neither are today's
Thindi, although the Vajji dynasty (620-740) build a formidable navy to control
their possessions in the Staircase.

Chernese languages are written using regional variations on a syllabic alphabet
called the abracadabra, which has three to four hundred symbols. Numbers are
written using positional notation and zero; fractions are well known, but
trigonometry is a recent invention, and mathematics relies more on geometric
analogy than on calculation.

The four most recent practical inventions of note in Cherne are lenses,
mechanical clocks, the printing press, and hot air balloons. Telescopes and
spectacles first appeared in Barra Bantang in the early 1000s, and quickly
spread along Bantangui trade routes. Hett tinkers were experimenting with
mechanical clocks as long ago as the 800s, but prejudice, coupled with
historical accounts and folk tales of Pilot monsters used during the
Disputation, continues to inhibit their adoption. (A public clock tower in
Leyselle was destroyed by an angry mob as recently as 1207.)

As far as the rest of the world knows, the printing press was invented in 1124
by a Seyfertois nobleman. In fact, he based his first press on notes and a
model left behind on Avaunt when the Hett were driven into exile. Seyferte,
Ensworth, Praczedt, Ruuda, and the Twin Admiralcies all now have lively printing
trades.

The hot air balloon was invented in southern Thind. They are not as
maneuverable or as reliable as clouds, and any competent magician can work a
spell that provides better battlefield surveillance, but Avaunt's route from
Apcha Bantang to Normous Berth is speckled with balloon operators, who will
carry passengers and messages to and from the mountain for a fee.

Gunpowder is unknown in Cherne. Given the scarcity of sulfur (the only source
is Mount Narjemczy), it is likely to remain so. There is some evidence that the
Hett were experimenting with steam engines in the 700s, but their work was lost
when they were driven off Avaunt in 751.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## History

### Age of Heroes

- YS 0: Sulk's Grief; final destruction of the Pilot Angels.
- 189: Janbinder the Great completes conquest of southern Cherne, founds first imperial Thindi dynasty.
- 200: *Nemeszy* settlement of the Staircase begins.
- 240-241: dragonets hatch on Sulk Minor.
- 299: Death of Janbinder the Great; Janindi dynasty governs Thind.
- 302: Ealx and Heot flee to western Cherne.
- 308: Uws founds eponymous kingdom on shores of Lake Sibor.
- 330: Harpad Praczedneteny unifies eastern seaboard.
- 454: Harpad Praczedneteny killed by first eruption of Mount Narjemczy.
- 478-85: Pale Remainder conquer northern Cherne; Uws dies in YS 483 (?).

### Age of the Same

- 507: Pale Remainder crush First Rebellion; outlying regions of Ruuda completely depopulated.
- 508-581: first Darpani conquest of Thind.
- 600: Thind annexes the Staircase.
- 620-740: Vajji dyntasty in Thind.
- 664-735: Bantangui drive Thindi out of Ini Bantang, establish the Forty Fleets.
- 713: Uws reunified under Szarkosy dynasty.
- 740-877: Verunajji dynasty in Thind.
- 751: Conquest of Avaunt; Hett driven into exile.
- 786: Pale Remainder crush Second Rebellion.
- 811: Yegor the Second drives the Hett out of Uws.
- 855: Pale Remainder crush Third Rebellion.
- 877: Arruhab VI invades Sullair; Sulk eats Thindi nobility.
- 878-1014: Second Darpani conquest of Thind.
- 900-1000: Forty Fleets merge to form Twin Admiralcies; Bantangui empire begins expansion northward.
- 919: Sarpang River driven from its banks to destroy Thindi city of Chauhary.
- 933: Szarkosy kingdom collapses in Uws.
- 942: Kembe born.
- 944-1031: Juan di Perçalle, Aranese poet and saint.
- 966: Plangent overwhelmed by the sea; Saarumeva River disappears.
- 967-70: Pale Remainder crush Fourth Rebellion.
- 985-6: Fourette conquered by Seyferte and Leyselle.

### Modern Age

- 1000 (approx): Telescope and spectacles first appear in Barra Bantang.
- 1005: Society for Inoffensive Conversation founded in Ossisswe.
- 1014-present day: Mohendjari dynasty in Thind.
- 1017: Uws reunified under Barsadov dynasty.
- 1023: University founded in Ensworth.
- 1031: Introduction of Lampwatcher's Eve (40-year correction to calendar).
- 1040-1120: Death of Dogs.
- 1045-60: locks and canals in Uws rebuilt.
- 1051: Filipe di Moyeyo founds reflectory at Cuayaçir in Araña.
- 1050-1100: Karabandi city-states assert independence from Thind.
- 1091-1100: Fifth Rebellion; Pale Remainder overthrown.
- 1120-30: Ruuda annexes southern Upuliaq.
- 1124: Printing press "invented" in Seyferte. 
- 1134: the *Unshadowed Land* and three other ships leave Jalkelainen.
- 1140: the *Unshadowed Land* returns to Jalkelainen, completing the first mundane circumnavigation of Cherne since the Age of Heroes.
- 1146: Ruuda annexes Vaarda.
- 1140-50: First attempt by Bantangui to annex Karaband.
- 1165-71: Second attempt by Bantangui to annex Karaband.
- 1170: First inoculations against smallpox in Araña.
- 1178: Petcharatiriv born in Mau Esan.
- 1193: *Salt and Gold*
- 1194-8: Siege of Armaq.
- 1200: Vurt born in Coriandel.
- 1203: Sehdie born in Coriandel.
- 1215: Yuriy II Barsadov becomes King of Uws.
- 1220: *Beneath Coriandel*
- 1220-25: The Wrestler drives Ruuda out of Upuliaq.
- 1223: "A Gentleman" in Anyalcze.
- 1223-24: Sweet and Buckle in Nevy Rav and Darp.
- 1224-26: Nobility of southern Uws rebel against Yuriy II Barsadov.
- 1226: Eimin born in Medef.
- 1229: Tahura born in Marandine.
- 1230: Evan Prince Ensworth born in Ensworth.
- 1239: *Eimin in Medef*
- 1240: *Eimin in Ossisswe*
- 1243: *The Prince and the Cloudherd*
- 1245: *Eimin in the Balance*
- 1247: *The Princess and the Bear*
- 1248: Piaerre born in Starboard Town.
- 1251: Evan Prince Ensworth at the University.
- 1252: *The Last Wolf*
- 1261: *The Bookster's Apprentice*
- 1264: *The Anvil's Wife*
- 1267: *Adrift in a Fleet of Stars*

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Language

Modern Chernese languages are descended from six parents, all of which were
derived from the simple pidgin the Pilot Angels used to speak to their human
servants.

Ulaq is spoken throughout Upuliaq; there are many regional variations, but most
Ulaq can make themselves understood to most others. The language has only had a
written form since the Ruudians arrived in YS 1120. Many loan words have
entered coastal Ulaq dialects since then, such as *istal* (steel) and *irom*
(strong liquor).

The northern family of languages includes Ruudian (also spoken in Vaarda),
Uwsian, and Praczny. Ruudian vocabulary and pronunciation is almost uniform
along the entire north coast. In contrast, Bessiyan (the Uwsian dialect spoken
in the northwestern uplands bordering the Herd of Trees) is only partly
comprehensible to speakers of Osero-Uwsian (the dialect of the shores of Lake
Sibor) and Moreo-Uwsian, which is spoken along the coast, and which borrows much
of its grammatical complexity from Praczny. Praczny has adopted many Uwsian
nouns and verbs in exchange, but there is little cross-pollination from the
south, where Hrstil Canyon separates the coastal region from Thind.

The western family of languages comprises Seyfertois (spoken in Seyferte,
Leyselle, Bruyere, and Aixeme), Enswer (spoken in Ensworth, Colway, and Derway),
and Aranese. (A fourth language, Plangentine, is still spoken in a few villages
in southern Bruyere.) Aranese has become the language of diplomacy throughout
most of Cherne, primarily due to the spread of the Balance. At the same time,
the University's pre-eminence has made Enswer the common tongue of scholars all
around the world.

Darpani is spoken over a wider area than any other language in Cherne. It is
remarkably uniform, as young men are usually required to marry into a tribe
other than the one they were born in. Clans also have "secret languages" of
their own, which consist of a few hundred replacement words, and some simple
inversions of grammatical structure. The Black Sun tribe also has a "secret
language", which reminds the few scholars who have heard it of Hettan. Further
south, Karabandi's vocabulary is very similar to Darpani's, though its grammar
is much simpler. (As one wit put it, Karabandi is Darpani with the poetry taken
out.)

The southern family of languages includes Bantangui, Thindi, Sullairean, and
several lesser languages spoken by mountain tribes in the southern Brumosos.
Antique Thindi is used in royal courts, by poets, and by magicians who want to
be really, really sure that their words cannot be misinterpreted. Sullairean is
a close cousin, although it has lost many words over the centuries. Modern, or
Vulgar, Thindi has been strongly influenced by Darpani as a result of the first
and second conquests, and by Bantangui through several centuries of close
contact.

The only other human languages of note on Cherne are Hettan and the various
languages used by the *nemeszy* of Yr. Scholars have found many similarities
between them, and between the customs, calendars, and beliefs of these scattered
peoples. These languages are completely unlike Cherne's others, and seem to owe
little or nothing to the Pilot Angels.

Finally, there are Song, the half-tonal language of the giants, and the sign
speech that the Gifted use to communicate with each other. Despite its name,
and claims made by many scholars who should know better, Song is not actually
sung. Instead, intonation—rising, falling, level, and so on—is as much a part
of words as vowels and consonants. The Bantangui believe that the lilting
accent of Ini Bantang is copied from Song.

Whether or not sign speech is a language depends on what is meant by "language".
Gifted creatures use posture, smell, and other non-verbal signals to exchange
information, such as "safe place", "good food", or "another foolish human".
Some, such as forest trolls and cave lions, even teach simple signs to ungifted
members of their own species, which makes for formidable hunting groups. Human
beings who have been raised by Gifted animals in the wild, and have learned sign
speech, are stock figures in Chernese folklore. Some of these stories are even
true: the hero Uws was in fact raised by bears, while the great Bantangui
admiral Leu Yan was rescued from a shipwreck by dolphins when she was nine, and
did not see another human being for three years.

### Avauntois/Seyfertois

- *bouquinnaire*: Someone who barbecues meat (usually rabbit)

* sorçir*: Magician

- *surrepeçiere*: One who whispers

- *tehanu*: A prayer for the dead

### Bantangui

- *Im awa pfa ta*: Oh no, not this again

- *mau*: A beached ship Mingala

- *ba*: Good morning (literally, "Fair winds at dawn")

### Darpani

- *armnepeteli*: Nemesis (literally, "a ghost's revenge in flesh")

- *lelosiñi*: Outcast (literally, "flesh without meaning")

- *innetené*: A moment of truth that reveals a person's character.

- *iyemnelili*: Abomination (literally, flesh mis-made with evil intent)

- *naneien*: Tongue-tied (an insult)

- *semtep*: A token of a dead person (typically a lock of hair)

- *usti!*: Sit! (said to an animal)

### Hett/Praczny

- *Ap medji eshweggen.*: Sit forcefully on your sword.

- *Arap be Praczny pertakken in pidje.*: He speaks Praczny, but not well
  (literally, "like a child").

- *Ashenope!*: Take it!

- *Ashenope arra te paurenatepe ejo!*: Take it to the others right away!

- *Auedje ne atarappa paurenatepe ke fe iuadje te?*: Where is the precious thing that I seek?

- *Aweche panja nesh perwerketeppen ubbo.*: He says he won't do what you say.

- *Bedpe kirrem awrechuk.*: I am coming to obey.

- *birbetke*: A collection (of books)

- *errebe*: I was.

- *Eshe*: Enter.

- *Ede ebpeten.*: Get him up (on his feet).

- *Eue?*: Who's there?

- *Forchem!*: Shoot them!

- *forløpre*: To run

- *gangre*: To walk

- *hara?*: Yes, sir?

- *hesht!*: Stop!

- *Hesht aue paratte!*: Stop right there!

- *Hurtiyet!*: Catch them.

- *Idjen cakhuisa.*: Clean the outhouses.

- *Immet na perressagern, nesh karpe abj terteperressagern.*: Use the tunnels, but not the major ones.

- *In Hepje Het zaue buikken apchala erregan.*: Take the bookster to Hepje Hett.

- *Inesh Praczny pertakken.*: I speak some Praczny.

- *Ippe arenteme ephwe bae cakhuisa?*: Is he allowed to go to the outhouse?

- *Irre pentelele arpe hebmedji sheh kerremerpele.*: I bet that would be as warm as wool.

- *Ke betpe kirremperetche.*: And do it quickly.

- *kjøpre*: To buy.

- *klatre*: To climb.

- *Nas na forchem.*: Don't shoot them.

- *Nauesh be koln pertakken.*: I don't speak your language.

- *nesh.*: No

- *Nettin ya!*: There they are!

- *penteche*: Mercenary

- *Pertakka arapche be keprelaptekete arjo?*: Can you understand what I'm saying?

- *selgre*: To sell

- *Sho!*: Yes, sir!

- *Teppate me peua netahante adj auje.*: Not without your sword, you won't.

- *urem*: Guide (noun)

- *uremme*: Pilot (noun; literally, "superlative guide")

- *Ve nesse arja me.*: I think so (literally, "It appears so to me.")

- *Yevve!*: Time's up!

- *Yesh merreme.*: Open up.

- *yevtene*: He was traveling

- *Yeshed nausi pra tallein.*: We take no side.

- *Nausi bayian?*: Whose side (are you on)?

### Karabandi

- *Ahete saad anneme epe assa*: May your genitals be struck with leprosy

- *Ayah*: Just a moment

- *deel*: A long, loose desert robe

- *He mashe sidi*: I gratefully return your salute (students to teacher).

- *Heshidi*: I salute you (teacher to student).

- *iye*: No

- *Masa il-kutna duttaqun as saa*: Fill your water jars, a storm is coming.

- *Nais!*: Make ready!

- *Shalma'a*: Good evening

- *saad*: Leprous flesh (vulgar)

- *sra*: Sieur (male honorific)

- *Teh!*: Strike! 

- *umram*: Arena

- *Ye mashe aue*: By my name (equivalently, by my soul)

### Ruudian

- *ælfwif*: Magician (literally, "wind wife")

### Song

- *igbe ye*: Magician (literally, "bald strength")

- *ngelema basuwo*: Evil stepmother

### Uwsian

- *royka*: A broad-beamed, slow-moving river boat.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## Stories

The subsections below describe stories (actual or planned) set in Cherne.

### The Cloudherd Trilogy

These three books follow a girl named Tahura, and a young prince named Evan,
from the ages of 13 to 21. They are aimed at readers aged 10-15.

#### *The Prince and the Cloudherd*

This story is set in the cloudherd village of Marandine; its protagonist is a
young girl named Tahura, whose life is turned upside down when the lowlander
Evan Prince Ensworth takes refuge among the cloudherds. They initially spar
with one another, then become wary friends, but their friendship and courage are
tested when Marandine is attacked by the prince's enemies. With the help of a
worn-out magician and a cynical tiger, they must somehow find the courage to
make the sacrifices needed to save the village.

#### *The Princess and the Bear*

Four years after helping save Marandine, Prince Evan and his mentally challenged
sister, Princess Sophie, are in Apple Bridge, where the prince commands the
regiment responsible for patrolling the magically-transformed region known as
the Blight. Tahura's arrival on cloudback triggers a chain of events that leads
to Princess Sophie's abduction by a bear with a grudge. Desperate to find his
sister, will the prince realize in time that an ancient evil has resurfaced?

#### *The Last Wolf*

Now in their early twenties, Tahura and Prince Evan are part of a delegation
sent north to negotiate an end to a war between the Empty Throne of Ruuda and
the tribes of Upuliaq. Amid double-crosses, a murder, and the discovery that
Tahura's new boyfriend is a werewolf, can they save both sides from themselves?

### Eimin's Trilogy

These novels are told in the first person by Eimin, an Aphsi who doesn't share
the empathic abilities of the rest of his people.

#### *Eimin in Medef*

As his thirteenth birthday nears, Eimin is offered a chance to join a secret
society devoted to protecting the Aphsi from outsiders. Torn between wanting to
be "normal", and his desire to be respected, he must get to the bottom of a
series of strange crimes that no one else seems to notice happening.

#### *Eimin in Ossisswe*

A year later, Eimin and Razi are in Ossisswe, the City of a Thousand Magicians.
As a century-old power struggle between two magical factions comes to a head,
Eimin must decide which of his new-found friends he can trust, and which he must
betray.

#### *Eimin in the Balance*

In the final volume of the trilogy, Eimin must choose once and for all between
happiness and responsibility when faced with a threat that could change his
people's lives forever.

### The Avaunt Trilogy

From Bosnia to Palestine, and the Amazon rainforest to the Australian Outback,
the twin questions of land and nationality are among the most troublesome the
world faces today. These three books explore these issues as the original
inhabitants of the Flying Mountain return to claim their ancestral home.

#### *The Bookster's Apprentice*

The first book in this trilogy describes the events leading up to the conquest
of Avaunt by the Hett. Driven off the mountain six hundred years ago, and
persecuted ever since, the Hett have uncovered an ancient source of magical
power. We watch through the eyes of a young would-be scholar named Piaerre as
the certainties he has grown up with are brought into question. Who's land is
it? How much do one people owe another for wrongs committed in the past? And if
people won't negotiate, when—if ever—is it right to resort to force?

#### *The Anvil's Daughter*

The second volume is set three years after the first. Its central character is
a young Hett woman wrestling with growing questions about the rights and wrongs
of what her people are doing.

#### *Adrift in a Fleet of Stars*

In the final volume of the trilogy, the Avauntois and the Hett discover that
they are pawns in a much larger game, the outcome of which will shape the future
of entire worlds.

### Miscellaneous

Some of the minor characters in the books described above also appear in these
standalone stories.

#### *The Voyage of the Unshadowed Land*

A mock-history of the first non-magical circumnavigation of Cherne after the
fall of the Pilot Angels by the Ruudian ship *Unshadowed Land*.

#### *Salt and Gold*

A young Parba Chol woman named Petcharatiriv escapes from a life of near-slavery
in Barra Bantang, only to find herself trapped in a prison run by the undead.

#### *Beneath Coriandel*

This novel explores a tangle of lives and loves in the desert city of Coriandel.
A young man descends into the crypts beneath the city to slay a monster; a woman
plots to steal her niece's youth; a talking horse foils a robbery, a ghost
remembers how it earned its name, and a magician wonders why she can't get a
particular nursery rhyme out of her head. In one night, their stories and
others come together. Swordplay, betrayal, forbidden love, a philosophically
inclined pair of boots.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

## To Do

### Maritime Navigation

After the disputation, while the dragon Sulk was brooding on her eggs, giant
eels multiplied without check, making the Yr impassable. Once the dragonets
hatched, Sulk began catching eels to feed them. Since the waters around Sullair
Major and Minor are their main spawning ground, and deepwater sailing is no
longer a suicide mission. This probably means moving the *nemeszy* to the
southwest…

I also need to figure out what to do about compasses and wayfinding.

### Religion

One of the things I haven't really addressed in any of my stories (or thinking)
is what it would be like for the people of Cherne to live in the shadow of
greatness. "We're smaller than our ancestors" is a common theme in fantasy
literature—almost universal, in fact. Turns out it's nearly universal in the
real world, too, and not just among Medieval Europeans surrounded by roads and
bridges made by the Romans that they couldn't replicate. The ancient Greeks
thought that Homer's time had been a Golden Age, and that their world was brass
by comparison; successive generations of Chinese, Arab, and more recently
American writers have bemoaned the same thing.

This tendency would only be more pronounced in Cherne, where civilization would
be built on top of and among the ruins of something superhuman. My thoughts
(scribbled briefly, because I'm supposed to be writing a proposal for a
professional master's degree in CS) are that reactions would divide along the
following lines:

"Good riddance." This school thinks primarily about how close humanity came to
extinction during the Disputation. Their belief can be summed up less
succinctly as, "There is nothing so wonderful as a thousand angels, a thousand
miles away."

"Come home, we'll be good." These people remember the stability and wonder of
the Angels' reign, and want it back. They live according to what they believe
are Angelic rules, in the hope that good behavior will bring a return to a
golden age.

"Aspera ad astra." Another group believe that the Angels weren't inhuman—they
were people who had somehow evolved to a higher (but not perfect) state of
being. Their main aim is to uncover the secret for themselves; there are of
course many different opinions regarding what the secret is, and how to find it.

Each of these is the basis for some religious practices, and yes, I'm going to
have them: every human society has had some normative beliefs about bigger
questions, and the Chernese will be more believable if they do too. It also
creates opportunities for interesting kinds of conflict: it's easy to imagine
followers of any of the schools of thought described above regarding the other
two as dangerously wrong.

### Other Thoughts on Religion

I mostly ducked religion in the original construction of Cherne. This wasn't
just because I'm an atheist (although I did like the idea of a world where
people are secure enough that they haven't needed to invent supernatural hall
monitors to keep themselves in line). The real reason is that religion is at
least as hard to do well as poetry. Most of the poetry in fantasy novels is
frankly embarrassing: invariably written in heroic couplets, it scans and
rhymes, but that's about it. Similarly, the "theology" of most fantasy worlds
is a pale reflection of a shadow of an echo of a memory of the richness of real
faiths.

Real religions' imagery, rituals, and mythologies have been synthesized over
centuries by thousands of people; it's not fair to ask someone writing at five
cents a word to match them, but that's still the standard they're going to be
measured against. It's similarly not fair to compare what Grud, God of Boots,
has to say about the meaning of life with the subtle reasoning and ecstatic
insight of some of the greatest minds in human history (however misdirected they
might have been). Far easier to leave it out.

The fact is, though, people do wonder about these things, even in fantasy
worlds, and the absence of gods in our universe never stopped us from making
them up. If people spent hundreds of generations or more working for powerful,
ageless creatures like the Uncertain Angels, they'd create mythologies about
them. Those mythologies would survive those creatures' self-destruction, but
mutate and diverge.

- Some people would remember "my tribe's patrons vs. those attacking them" as "good angels vs. bad".

- Others might forget that Sulk and her mate came to fight on one side, and remember the Angels as good, and the dragon(s) as bad.

- Some would decide that the Angels hadn't been different, just exceptional,
  and that people could become Angels if they could remember or discover how.
  A variation on that (popular in Ruuda since the rebellion) is that
  if anyone *does* become that powerful again, they'll trigger another Disputation.

- Some (the Thindi, I think, or the upper classes of most societies) would be "caretakers":
  they'd believe the Angels just left, and will come back if people reform.

In light of this, the Balance and Ruuda's sun "worship" are genuinely
innovative, since they consider the Angels irrelevant. The Darpani mythology
about the First Woman and Last Man is a vestige of a feral human belief; I'll
need to figure out what the *nemeszy* believe, and lots of others (not least the
giants of the southern Worldrim).

### More Thoughts on Darp

Darp is modeled on the lands and peoples of the Eurasian steppe and the American
west after the introduction of horses. It's the largest non-urban society in
Cherne (the other big ones being the Ulaq in the frozen north, and the jungle
tribes in the mountains of Barra Bantang). I want to make the following
changes:

- The world description says that the Thindi never conquered Darp (though the
  Darpani have conquered Thind three times). I should change this so that at
  its greatest extend, Thind actually got as far as Burning Rock. They only
  held sway on the plains for a century, but in that time, built several
  "garden cities" where precious water was used to recreate the lush greenery
  of home. (One of these was so extravagant that a small dam-formed lake was
  used to create artificial rainshowers simulating the monsoons of southern
  Thind.) Part of Burning Rock's garden is now used to grow medicines and
  spices, but the rest have all fallen into ruin, and strange creatures still
  lurk in the abandoned water tunnels.

- Rethink the Ghost Fog Valley. This
  was meant to be a "Dreamtime" where the rules of the mundane world are
  suspended, and magic holds sway. I don't know if such a place fits my
  conception of this world any longer, or if having it serves any purpose in
  the larger plot.

- If I keep the Ghost Fog Valley, I should introduce a few
  more of the "singular places" I've thought of, such as the cliffside in the
  sleepless country of the southeast where strange prophecies constantly write
  and rewrite themselves. It takes several days to get there, and several
  more to get back, so transcriptions of any kind are rare, and reliable ones
  rarer.

### Salt

Where does salt come from? I plan to deal with this by making it a feature
rather than a bug. Eimin (the central character in a planned trilogy) is
already supposed to be intelligent. I'm going to make him *very*
intelligent—Cherne's first experimental scientist. In the first story, he'll
notice how the wind has worn smooth the edges of the frozen waves in the Sea of
Glass, and wonder why that hasn't happened to mountains. In the second story,
he'll find old maps of the Az Delta (source of southern Cherne's "dirty salt"),
and realize that he can calculate how old the Ocean is by how much salt it
contains. In the third book, he'll admit that these calculations are
complicated by figuring out how much water has been lost to the whirlpool in Ini
Bantang, but argue that it's still possible to estimate. This will all play
into the revelations about the Big Secret in the Flying Mountain trilogy.

### The Legal System of the Regimental Kingdoms

The villain of the first Cherne story I wrote was George Prince Nuthe, who
rebelled unsuccessfully against the King of Ensworth. I decided a couple of
years ago that I wanted that story to be about how conflicts suck bystanders in,
and how you can find yourself committed to a side, only to discover that it
might not be the right one. To do that, I need to give George a sympathetic
reason for rebelling. What I've come up with is this: in the Regimental
Kingdoms, you can't use a law without paying a fee. If you can't afford use of
the law, you can't use it in court. Aristocratic families "rent" laws from the
king, and in turn rent them out to everyone else.

The young Prince Nuthe decides that this is unfair, as it means that in
practice, the rich have more rights than the poor. Believing that if everyone
could use the law, it would make society fairer, he starts letting anyone who
wants to use the laws he "owns" for free. The aristocracy try to stop him, but
mass opinion is on his side. Ironically, of course, he discovers that the rich
still have an advantage in court, since they can afford lawyers who know the law
better than their opponents. He therefore decides the solution is to do away
with laws altogether (i.e., anarchism), which is the point at which the King of
Ensworth says, "Enough is enough."

### Slavery

Slavery was a bigger part of history than we're comfortable admitting. So far,
though, its only appearance in Cherne is in the one-sentence outline of the
unwritten story Salt and Gold. This needs to change:

- Slavery was abolished in Ruuda some years after the *Unshadowed Land*
  expedition. Friida's Ryutaanan was anti-abolition (gives her feet of clay);
  this is what led to her exile.

- It takes the same form in Uws and Thind:
  people sell themselves into bondage for a period of years (usually to pay
  debts). The children of slaves are theoretically free, but in practice,
  they usually inherit their parents' debts, and have to sell themselves as
  well, so there is a de facto underclass. (There are racial overtones in
  Thind as well: most of the underclass are descended from original
  inhabitants, as those claiming Darpani descent are generally too proud to do
  this.)

- The Darpani make slaves of their prisoners, but the children of
  slaves are as free as anyone else.

- The Bantangui don't keep slaves on
  their ships, but run a brisk trade back and forth across the Yr to keep
  plantations on both coasts populated. Lady Kembe was a slave as a child,
  and it is partly through her efforts over the centuries that slavery has
  disappeared in the Karaband.

- Slavery is legal in the Regimental Kingdoms,
  but uncommon. As elsewhere, the children of slaves are born free, but under
  a social stigma.

### The Problem With the Pale Remainder

The Pale Remainder are a combination of vampires and Frankenstein's monster:
they continuously rebuild themselves from body parts salvaged from their
victims, which are stitched together with moonlight. This makes them
potentially immortal, but direct sunlight destroys the stitching, and makes them
fall apart.

So far so good, but for story reasons, I need the resistance movement in Ruuda
(the northern territory they conquer and rule for sevearl centuries) to have the
same obsession with martyrdom as Shia Islam. I therefore say that whoever kills
one of the PR turns into a homicidal maniac the next time the moon rises. Their
human assassins know this, so killing a PR (which you can do by burning the
head) is a suicide mission that is taken on only by the truly committed.

The problem is that this "kill 'em and you go crazy" feature is all too
obviously tacked on. I still want the patient assassin-martyrs, but I need
another reason why acing a PR is a one-way trip—something that flows much more
naturally from their stitched-together nature.

### Cautionary Tales

Cherne's magic system was designed to explain two things: why magicians don't
rule the world, and why they're so weird. Magicians have to trade power over
their lives for power over the world: in exchange for never wearing red, for
example, they can remove the bitterness from coffee, and so on. By the time a
magician can summon lightnings or make a flying carpet, she can't be in a room
with more than four other people, and has to hold a lemon in her hands at all
times.

I thought this magical system would also lead to some cute cautionary tales.
What happens if a magician accepts two spell-prices that interact in bad ways?
The only problem is, I haven't been able to think of any—I'm not a natural
puzzle solver.
