---
title: "A Moral Equivalent of the Turing Test"
date: 2017-02-06
---

Given recent discussions about how Silicon Valley CEOs are dealing
with the Trump Administration, I'd like to propose a moral equivalent
of the Turing Test.  In the original Turing Test, a person sits at a
desk facing two terminals.  One is connected to a computer, the other
to a human being, but the person conducting the test doesn't know
which is which.  If she cannot reliably distinguish the two after a
few minutes of conversation, the computer program is, for all
practical purposes, intelligent.

Here's the update I propose.  One subject is intelligent and has a
good poker face, but is completely amoral, and willing to accommodate
anything provided it's good for profits.  The other is also concerned
about profits, but may or may not have a conscience.  Both recognize
that society finds sociopaths distasteful, so both will say the same
things about valuing respect and diversity.  If we cannot distinguish
the second CEO from the first by their actions, then Occam's Razor
(and a lot of Twentieth Century history) require us to conclude that
*the second CEO is just as amoral as the first*.

And this is why I object to people using the term "leader" when
referring to Musk, Cook, Sandberg, Zuckberberg, and everyone else who
has kissed Trump's ring.  Their defenders say, "They're smart.
They're playing a long game.  They can do more good on the inside than
they can shouting in protest marches."  But how do we know they
actually want to do good?  They might care if Muslims are
discriminated against, or they might just care that a ban would make
it harder for them to hire skilled workers.  No matter what soothing
noises they make to deflect social embarrassment, we have no reason to
believe that they are acting in anything other than self-interest
unless and until they can pass a moral Turing Test.
