---
title: "Version 3 Feedback"
date: 2018-04-28 03:30
year: 2018
---

Version 3 of *How to Teach Programming (and Other Things)* is now kinda sorta maybe ready for feedback:
if you have time to go through 270 pages and tell me what's missing, redundant, confusing, or just plain wrong,
I'd be very grateful.
I'm hoping to get the book out in June,
so anything you can give me before then would be a big help.

As background,
you can see [Version 2 here](http://third-bit.com/teaching/),
and [the plan for Version 3 here]({{site.github.url}}/2018/03/20/plan-for-version-3.html).
The book is meant to be a brief introduction to ideas and techniques I have found useful
when teaching free-range adult learners how to program, and covers:

* how learning works;
* how to design and maintain lessons;
* how to deliver those lessons; and
* how to grow a community of practice around teaching.

All of the material will be freely available under the
[Creative Commons - Attribution license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/);
digital copies will be free to download,
and printed copies will be available at cost.

## Who the Book is For

The people I had in mind when compiling this book are:

- **Emily** trained as a librarian, and how works as a web designer
  and project manager in a small consulting company.  In her spare
  time, she helps run web design classes for women entering tech as a
  second career.  She is now recruiting colleagues to run more classes
  in her area using the lessons that she has created, and wants to
  know how to grow a volunteer teaching organization.

- **Moshe** is a professional programmer with two teenage children
  whose school doesn't offering programming classes.  He has
  volunteered to run an after-school program, and while he frequently
  gives presentations to colleagues, he has no experience designing
  lessons.  He wants to learn how to build effective lessons in
  collaboration with others, and is interested in turning his lessons
  into a self-paced online course.

- **Samira** is an undergraduate in robotics who is thinking about
  becoming a full-time teacher after she graduates.  She wants to help
  teach weekend workshops for undergraduate women, but has never
  taught an entire class before, and feels uncomfortable teaching
  things that she's not an expert in.  She wants to learn more about
  education in general in order to decide if it's for her.

- **Gene** is a professor of computer science whose research area is
  operating systems.  They have been teaching undergraduate classes
  for six years, and increasingly believe that there has to be a
  better way. The only training available through their university's
  teaching and learning center relates to posting assignments and
  grades in the learning management system, so they want to find out
  what else they ought to be asking for.

These people have *a variety of technical backgrounds*
and *some previous teaching experience*,
but *no formal training in teaching, lesson design, or community organization*.
Most work with *free-range learners*
(i.e., outside institutional classrooms with required homework and externally-mandated curriculum)
and are *focused on teenagers and adults* rather children;
all *have limited time and resources*.
Each will use this material differently:

- **Emily** will take part in a weekly online reading group with her
  volunteers.

- **Moshe** will cover part of this material in a two-day weekend
  workshop and study the rest on his own.

- **Samira** will use this material in a one-semester undergraduate
  course with assignments, a project, and a final exam.

- **Gene** will read the book on their own in their office or while
  commuting, wishing all the while that universities did more than pay
  lip service to high-quality teaching.

If any of these people sound like you,
please [get in touch](mailto:gvwilson@third-bit.com).

**Contents**

1. Introduction
   1. Who You Are
   1. History
   1. Have a Code of Conduct
   1. Acknowledgments
   1. Challenges
1. Building Mental Models
   1. Formative Assessment
   1. Challenges
1. Expertise and Memory
   1. Repetition vs. Deliberate Practice
   1. Concept Maps
   1. Seven Plus or Minus Two
   1. Challenges
1. Cognitive Load
   1. Split Attention
   1. Pattern Recognition
   1. Minimal Manuals
   1. A Final Thought
   1. Challenges
1. Individual Learning
   1. Six Strategies
   1. Time Management
   1. Peer Assessment
   1. Final Thoughts
   1. Challenges
1. A Lesson Design Process
   1. Learner Personas
   1. Learning Objectives
   1. Maintainability
   1. Challenges
1. Pedagogical Content Knowledge
   1. What's Our Baseline?
   1. What Do Students Misunderstand?
   1. What Are We Teaching Them Now?
   1. Do Languages Matter?
   1. What Does Student Code Look Like?
   1. How Do Students Program?
   1. What Mistakes Do Learners Make?
   1. What About Testing and Debugging?
   1. Do Error Messages Matter?
   1. Does Visualization Matter?
   1. How Can We Help Them?
   1. How Should We Design Lessons?
   1. Final Thoughts
   1. Challenges
1. Teaching as a Performance Art
   1. Feedback
   1. How to Practice Teaching
   1. Live Coding
   1. Challenges
1. In the Classroom
   1. Enforce the Code of Conduct
   1. Teach Together
   1. Assess Prior Knowledge
   1. Plan for Mixed Abilities
   1. Take Notes Together
   1. Sticky Notes
   1. Peer Instruction
   1. Never a Blank Page
   1. Setting Up Your Learners
   1. Other Teaching Practices
   1. Limit Innovation
   1. Feedback
   1. Challenges
1. Motivation and Demotivation
   1. Demotivation
   1. Impostor Syndrome
   1. Stereotype Threat
   1. Mindset
   1. Accessibility
   1. Inclusivity
   1. Why Learn to Program?
   1. Challenges
1. Teaching Online
   1. MOOCs
   1. Video
   1. Automatic Grading
   1. Flipped Classrooms
   1. Life Online
   1. Challenges
1. Exercise Types
   1. The Classics
   1. Tracing
   1. Diagrams
   1. Higher-Level Thinking
   1. Challenges
1. Building Community
   1. Learn, Then Do
   1. Three Steps
   1. Retention
   1. Governance
   1. Meetings, Meetings Meetings
   1. The Post Mortem
   1. Final Thoughts
   1. Challenges
1. Marketing
   1. What Are You Offering to Whom?
   1. Branding and Positioning
   1. The Art of the Cold Call
   1. A Final Thought
   1. Challenges
1. Partnerships
   1. Working With Schools
   1. Working Outside Schools
   1. Final Thoughts
   1. Challenges
1. Why I Teach
1. Bibliography
1. Appendices
   1. License
   1. Code of Conduct
   1. Citation
   1. Using This Material
   1. In Person
   1. How to Contribute
   1. Glossary
   1. Lesson Design Template
   1. Checklists for Events
   1. Presentation Rubric
   1. Teamwork Rubric
   1. Pre-Assessment Questionnaire
   1. Ten Quick Tips for Teaching Programming
   1. Design Notes
