---
title: "Count 'Em"
date: 2007-12-16 21:44:39
year: 2007
---
The solstice is approaching, so it's time to count 'em. Do you remember how it felt the first time you:
<ul>
  <li>implemented a <code>for</code> loop to find the length of a string, <em>in assembly</em>, and finally understood how computers actually worked?</li>
  <li>read <cite>Software Tools in Pascal</cite>, and discovered that there was more to programming than writing legal code?</li>
  <li>realized that 1+1/2+1/4+1/8… converges, but 1+1/2+1/3+1/4… doesn't?</li>
  <li>read <cite>Neuromancer</cite>, <cite>Wyrd Sisters</cite>, <cite>The Dark Knight</cite>, or an Elmore Leonard novel?</li>
  <li>saw <cite>Star Wars</cite> (back before they ruined it with <cite>Return of the Jedi</cite>), <cite>Grosse Pointe Blank</cite>, <cite>The Mummy</cite>, or <cite>Casablanca</cite>?</li>
  <li>listened to The Clash, Talking Heads, The The, Peter Gabriel, Mary Margaret O'Hara, Ike Quebec, Thelonius Monk, or Ali Farka Toure?</li>
  <li>laughed until your belly hurt because the only other thing to do was cry?</li>
  <li>woke up at home in a foreign country?</li>
  <li>had a really good idea that actually worked?</li>
  <li>saw someone you didn't know reading a newspaper article you had written?</li>
  <li>played liars' dice with friends until closing time?</li>
  <li>threw a frisbee right to someone fifty meters away?</li>
  <li>received spam?</li>
  <li>said exactly the right thing at exactly the right time and made a hundred people laugh?</li>
  <li>watched your opponent's ion frigates plow into the minefield you'd spent half an hour laying down?</li>
  <li>saw someone you didn't know using software you had written?</li>
  <li>had someone thank you for talking them out of dropping out of school?</li>
  <li>held your firstborn?</li>
</ul>
