---
title: "Eimin in Ossisswe"
template: page
fiction: true
---

Different people believe different things about what happens to you when
you die. The Garheimmen fought for three hundred years to free
themselves from vampires. They believe that the souls of the righteous
rise up to the sun, so that they can shine down on us forever. In the
Nine Marches, people grow wheat and apples. They bury their dead, to
thank the earth for its bounty. Just as flesh becomes grass and wood and
flesh again, so too, they believe, are the spirits of the dead taken up
to become spirit once again.

The pirates of Ini Bantang and Barra Bantang believe in rebirth too,
except they believe we are reborn as ourselves, to live our lives over
again. Whenever something bad happens, they say *im awa pha ta*, which
means, "Oh no, not this again." And I met a tiger once, from Thind, who
told me that when we die, we're dead, and all the rest is just silly
monkey foolishness. But then he asked me to ring a bell in memory of a
friend of his who had died in these mountains, so perhaps tigers can be
foolish too.

You remember the tiger, do you? Well, he remembers you, too. He has one
less ear now, and grumbles more than he growls, but yes, he has not yet
become part of the sun, or turned into apples.

Now, in the Karaband, where I was born, people believe that when you
die, you get to tell the story of your life one more time. It doesn't
matter if it's an exciting story, or full of great achievements. All
that matters is whether you enjoy hearing it yourself.

Karabandi practice telling their stories all their lives. Every so
often, they go to a listener and say, "This is the tale of me."
Listeners don't judge---at least, we're not supposed to. We just listen,
and ask questions, and try to help people discover what their stories
are really about. In the Karaband, we think it's important to know what
your life is about while you're living it.

And we think that the best way to teach people how to tell their stories
is to tell them your own, so, if I may at your pleasure have a little
more tea for my throat? Yes, thank you, a drop or two of honey would be
wonderful. There's something about mountain air---it's no drier than the
desert, but still... Mmm... Thank you, it's delicious.

So, *la,* my name is Eimin, and this is the tale of me. If I were from
Ini Bantang or Barra Bantang, I would start by telling you who my
parents and grandparents were. If I were Anuat, I would sing my story,
while you sang choruses back to me. But since I am me, I will start with
a memory that is as sharp and as clear after all these years as
newly-mined glass.

I was fourteen, and I was afraid that I was going to cry. The children I
grew up with wouldn't have thought twice about crying. After all, even
if they held their tears back, everyone around them would know they
wanted to.

Not me. Fourteen years of being the odd one out had taught me to hold
back my tears back, and my laughter, and everything else. I was
fourteen, and I was *not* going to cry.

But then my mother hugged me. \"I wish you knew how much I love you,\"
she said fiercely.

The tears welled up. I hugged her back. \"I wish I did too,\" I choked.
But that was the problem: I didn\'t. Not really, not like other Aphsi.
That\'s why they were sending me away.

So I hugged my mother, *la*, then wiped my eyes on my sleeve and
shouldered my pack. Razi raised his hands to her, palms out, like this.
It's what desert people do to say hello, or goodbye, or "it is time", or
"what I have just said is the truth". My mother reached out and touched
my arm, just for a moment, then turned and walked away.

We were still an hour from Ossisswe, but the *deroma* of all those
people crowded together was already too strong for her. She was very
sensitive, my mother, even for an Aphsi. Her road led south, back to the
Crystal Sea and our home in Medef---her home, now, hers and my father's
and my brothers' and sister's, but not mine any more.

Razi and I went north. It wasn't until we were on the road that I
realized she had touched my sleeve right where I had wiped my tears.

\* \* \*

My name is Eimin. Not Eimin the Something, or Eimin of Somewhere, just
Eimin. I was born Aphsi, at the Medef oasis, on the north shore of the
Crystal Sea in the middle of the Karaband. Most Aphsi can *drome*
whether you are happy or sad, just as you can smell what is cooking
before you go into the kitchen. Aphsi mothers can tell that babies are
hungry or tired before they start to cry. Aphsi traders always know
whether the person they are bargaining with is honest. And Aphsi thieves
are the best in the world. They can *drome* when a street vendor is
sleepy, or whether a guard is paying more attention to the women washing
their hair in the courtyard below him than he is to the sound of tiles
being pried loose from the roof over his head.

But not me. I'm *nif*, like you. I kicked and kicked when I was inside
my mother because I couldn't *drome* her trying to soothe me. I squalled
as a baby when I couldn't see her or my father, even if they were just
in the other room of our house. And the other children---the other
children used to play a game with me called "surprise". They would sneak
up on me, then jump out and say, "Bah!" I would jump, or shriek, and
they would all laugh at my *deroma*. They thought it was funny, because
no-one had ever snuck up on them.

Sometimes I enjoyed the game. It was exciting, like hanging by my
fingertips on the side of a mountain while my feet groped around for
their next hold. More often, though, the game made me angry. I'd tell
them to stop, and they would, but only long enough for me to go back to
whatever I had been doing. They would wait until I was caught up in a
story, or in some embroidery, and then shout, "Bah!" again. I still have
a scar---here, on the ball of my thumb---from the time Hediyeh surprised
me while I was carving a new pawn for Razi's chess set. I was ten years
old, and the cut went right down to the bone. She had to go without food
for two days as punishment, and her mother and father gave my parents a
chicken and a spool of fine green thread, but I still have the scar.

That cut on my thumb is another way my story starts. Back then, I
thought Razi was just a wandering tinker who happened to be *nif* like
me. After my father stitched up my thumb, though, he and Razi sat and
talked for an hour under the palm trees by the oasis. There were still a
few palms in Medef then, and date trees, and fields of barley and blue
corn. The long drought was just beginning, and no-one knew how bad it
was going to be.

*La*, I'm getting ahead of myself, aren't I? So my father and Razi sat
and talked, and I sat by the door of our tent reading and picking at my
new stitches and feeling sorry for myself until the sun went down. The
next day, when I went to play chess with Razi, he asked to see my thumb.

"It's nothing," I said sullenly. "Let's just play."

He shook his head. "Show me," he insisted. I shrugged and held out my
hand. He inspected the four black stitches, then nodded.

"They used to do that to me too, you know. When I was your age." He took
his painted chessboard out of its leather sleeve and set it on the
stones in front of him. I took a pillow from the pile beside the mouth
of his small tent and sat down beside it.

"Did you ever cut yourself?" I asked as I set up my pieces.

"No, but look." He pulled up the right sleeve. An ugly white scar ran
from his elbow to his wrist. "When I was six, I got so tired of them
sneaking up on me that I climbed a date tree to get away from them. I
sat up there for, *la*, it must have been hours, just watching people
come and go below me. I still remember how peaceful it felt."

He laughed. "It was so peaceful that I fell asleep! And *hup*, down I
fell. I broke my arm so badly, they had to give me poppy flowers and cut
it open to straighten out the bones."

"I'd break my arm myself if it meant Hediyeh and the others couldn't
keep playing stupid tricks on me," I grumbled. I picked up a black pawn,
put my hands behind my back, then held them out to him, fists closed.

Razi didn't tap one. Instead, he made a gesture against bad luck: fists
held out, poking down at the ground with the first two fingers of each
hand. "You should be careful what you ask for," he said softly. "*La*,
and even more careful what you offer in return. There are those who
would take you up on such a hasty bargain."

I knew what he meant. There are no magicians among the Aphsi, but from
time to time one would pass through the oasis on the way to somewhere
else. But I also knew the tone of Razi's voice, and the look in his
eyes. It was the same look I saw in other people's eyes whenever our
oasis had visitors. It was pity. All of a sudden I felt angry. What
right did he have to pity me? He was as *nif* as I was! "Well, are you
going to choose or not?" I asked angrily.

He reached out as if to tap my left hand, then grabbed my wrists
instead, as quick as a snake. "Open up," he ordered. "Open up!"

"Ow!" I squawked. I opened up my hands to show the black pawn I had
taken from the board, and the other one that I had just finished
carving.

Razi let go of my wrists and laughed. "How did you know?" I asked,
rubbing each wrist with the opposite hand.

He grinned and pointed at the board. "You forgot to pick up a white
one," he told me. "If you're going to try to trick someone, *la*, you
have to think one move ahead. It's just like chess. *And* just like
life." He waggled one finger. "For example, think about---what was her
name? Hediyeh?"

"I'd rather not," I said sourly. I had spent hours carving that pawn...

He shook his head. "Eimin, just because you can't *drome*, it doesn't
mean you're deaf and blind. Look at pocket mice. No matter how quietly
you move, they always hear you coming. If you listen that hard, and see
what's there to be seen, and pay attention, all the time, then no-one
will ever be able to sneak up on you. And if you can learn to be as
still as a piece of glass, then one day maybe *you* will be able to
sneak up on *them*." He raised his hands, palms facing me: what I have
just said is true.

"But how?" I was so frustrated that my words sounded like a vulture's
squawk.

He lowered his hands. "I can teach you, if you want." He shrugged his
right shoulder and twisted his hand around, all in one smooth motion,
like this. Just that quickly there was a short, sharp knife in his hand.
The blade had been blackened, but sunlight glinted on its single razored
edge. I stared at it like a pocket mouse stares at a snake. Razi was far
more than just a wandering *nif* tinker, and like a magician, he was
offering far more than I had bargained for.

\* \* \*

They call Ossisswe the City of a Thousand Faces, because no matter where
you look, you can see yours in a mirror. As Razi and I walked through
the Lame Gate, I decided that "The City of a Thousand Smells" would be a
better name. The sun was turning orange on the horizon, but the market
by the gate was still crowded. Food, animals, people, and dung all threw
themselves at my nose, and the noise! People shouted and sang, told
stories and bragged about how wonderful the goods in their stalls were,
*la*, how sad that they must leave in just a few days for Heshweshwe or
Anephwe or the green fields of Ensworth, so far away, and therefore had
to sell them practically at cost, no, almost give them away to
discerning patrons such as ourselves. I had never heard so many voices
in my entire life. Even when the Aphsi had gathered at Medef two months
before, there hadn't been this much noise.

And the colors... No self-respecting Aphsi would wear a shirt that
didn't have a little embroidery on the cuffs. But here, people wore
shirts that were nothing *but* color. I saw a tinsmith working at a
small anvil wearing bright purple trousers and a matching turban. When
he lifted his head to wipe the sweat from his face, I saw that he had
dyed the ends of his moustache to match. Twin girls selling almond cakes
wore long coats, one blood red, the other as green as young palm leaves.
I felt very drab in my desert white---very drab, very conspicuous, and
very alone.

"Is it far?" I asked Razi. I had to raise my voice and ask a second time
before he heard me.

He shook his head. "Not far. Up there, by the camels, then right, then
the second left past the guard house. Then there's a rope bridge over
one of the old quarries, *la*, they keep saying they're going to put in
a proper one, but they never do, then it's straight up the hill to
Kembe's house." He grinned at me, a sudden flash of white teeth against
his black skin. "If you pick up your feet, we might even have time for a
game before dinner."

"Does Kembe play?" I asked a dozen steps later.

Razi hitched his pack up on his shoulders. It was three times the size
of mine, and he always walked with his hands hooked into the straps.
"Not any more. But she and I played almost every day when I lived here."

"Who won?"

He snorted. "Nobody ever beats a magician at chess, Eimin."

I skipped aside to avoid stepping on a bent-backed old man who was
sweeping clumps of camel dung into a reeking canvas bag. "What about
another magician?"

"They both lose," Razi replied. He hitched up his pack up again. "Come
on. It's not far."

We paused for a few moments on the bridge over the old quarry. The pit
was as deep as it was wide, but had been worked out long before I was
born. Dry sand lay red-brown in the corners of the diggings, decorated
here and there with a few dusty green weeds. For a moment I felt
homesick---despite its right angles and handholds, it reminded me the
desert around Medef. I didn't even notice the peacock preening himself
on one of the roofs above us until Razi pointed him out. We both made
the fingers-down sign against bad luck before setting off again.

The buildings around us grew more imposing as we trudged along. Once
upon a time, when the Clockwork Kings ruled the world, Ossisswe was a
great palace. Its ten thousand rooms were all made of glass, mined from
the Crystal Sea and tempered by powerful magic. Poets dedicated love
songs to it; people named their children after its gardens and pools.

The terrible spells that ended the Clockwork Kings' war with the
Underpeople sank the palace into the earth like a stone into water. Ages
later, its glass was the well from which Ossisswe drew its wealth. The
best pieces were as hard as steel, and cast no more shadow than your
breath. Even the cheap stuff was traded across the length and breadth of
Cherne. And from time to time the glass miners found special pieces,
magical pieces. Some were small enough to be set in a ring; others were
the size of a door. Some showed the past; others let you see a person's
dreams, or the bones beneath their skin. Those pieces were why
Ossisswe's other name was the City of a Thousand Magicians.

We climbed the hill to Kembe's house in silence. A few people passed us,
going down instead of up. They exchanged nods with Razi, but paid no
attention to me. White adobe walls stood on either side of the road,
making it a gully between whitewashed banks. Every fifty paces or so a
bright cloth awning shaded a door painted in matching colors.

We finally stopped in front of one painted gold and red. "Catch your
breath," Razi told me.

I nodded, too tired to reply. The horizon was nibbling at the sun's
lower edge. A slight breeze, just a hint of coolness, had come up. Below
me, Ossisswe glittered orange and red, or flashed yellow-white where a
cooking fire or a magic lantern reflected off glass walls. I saw a gap
in the rooftops that marked the quarry we had crossed. Beyond it was the
gate market, and beyond that, the Lame Gate itself, a pointed arch five
times the height of a man, standing astride the road like a man
straddling an irrigation ditch. Beyond that, there was just the road,
and the desert, and my mother. She would have stopped to make camp when
the sun first touched the horizon.

The houses and shops below me stood shoulder to shoulder, each built
against its neighbor. It was so different from home---each house in
Medef was fifty paces or more from its neighbors, so that people would
have some privacy when they slept.

The buildings themselves were made of bricks and quarried glass. The
bricks were whitewashed in the respectable parts of town, or ochre where
people couldn't pay for whitewash, or didn't care enough to. Razi had
warned me about the unwashed parts of town the night before.

"The warehouses are here, and here, south of the hill," he said, tracing
the major roads in the sand with his finger. My mother sat on the other
side of the campfire and listened as she grilled stringy strips of
rattlesnake for our dinner. "Anyone there at night is a thief or a
watchman, or both. Over here is where the caravans camp, downwind from
everyone else. It's safe enough during the day, if you don't mind having
your pocket picked, but stay clear of it after dark, and *la*, don't
accept any dinner invitations unless I'm with you, or you could wake up
in chains on your way to Ini Bantang. Everywhere else is safe enough, as
long as you keep your manners and your wits about you." Which was his
way of saying, as long as I didn't get into any fights, or go climbing
on a whim.

My mother suddenly tilted her head to one side. "People," she said.

"Close?" Razi asked.

She *dromed* a second longer, then shook her head. "The road." She
skewered a piece of snake and tossed it to him.

"Shall we?" Razi asked. I blinked. I wasn't in the desert any longer. I
was in Ossisswe, standing outside Kembe's house. My mother would
probably have found some eggs for dinner. There'd be no rattlesnake to
eat without a *nif* there to kill it.

A red and gold cord hung beside the door. Razi yanked it three times.
The stick at the other end went *thub thub thub* on the door drum.

The eyeslit in the door snapped open a few breaths later. Razi and I
raised our empty hands in greeting. Someone snorted loudly. The eyeslit
snapped shut. The door bar clanked, and the door swung open. An old
woman with leathery skin and suspicious eyes raised her own hands
briefly. "Be welcome in this place," she said sourly. "Lady Kembe is
expecting you."

\* \* \*

The old woman's name was Samila. She didn't seem to like us, or maybe
she was just annoyed by the dust we were tracking onto her freshly swept
tiles. We followed her across the house's outer courtyard and up a
flight of whitewashed steps. "I've slung hammocks in the wind room," she
told Razi over her shoulder. "You'll know where everything is." If she
heard us thank her, she gave no sign of it.

The house was built like a figure-8, two stories tall. The rooms on the
upper floor were narrower than those below, which left room for the
narrow covered walkway she led us along. Razi had told me that Kembe was
wealthy, but still---she had more space than any three families I knew
in Medef, and as I said, the Aphsi don't crowd together.

Samila stopped in front of a door that was nothing more than red and
gold cloth stretched over a slat frame like a kite. She rapped her
knuckles sharply on the little wooden door drum beside it. "They've
come, Lady Kembe."

"Be welcome," said a voice from inside---a woman's voice, though deep.
Samila nodded at Razi and left, no doubt to find a broom. We shrugged
off our packs and leaned them against the wall. Razi opened the door.

Kembe sat in an ornately carved wooden chair in front of an equally
ornate desk. Three books lay open on her desk. Three or four dozen
others looked down from a shelf above it. Soft white light came from a
rough-hewn chunk of glass the size of my first on a brass stand in one
corner. The breeze coming through the grille over the room's single
small window brought a faint scent of onions and lamb from the rear
courtyard.

Kembe was a barrel-shaped woman, a head taller than Razi when she stood,
a shade lighter, and completely bald. "Be welcome indeed," she said,
raising her hands. She and Razi touched palms formally, then embraced
awkwardly. Her right eye was milky. It twitched back and forth with a
life of its own. I wondered if she had been born like that, or if she'd
had an accident, or had bargained it away for magic.

Kembe and Razi let go of one another. Kembe stepped back and studied me
with her good eye. "And this must be young Eimin." Something cold
brushed across my heart. Magic...

She straightened up and rolled her head around to work the kinks out of
her neck. "Been at your books all day?" Razi asked conversationally.

Kembe nodded. "Yes, though I had much else to do. I only meant to catch
up on letters, but there was one from some camel-head up in Garheim who
wants a hundredweight of fine-grade opaline glass for some sort of
vampire trap---a single block, mind you, not a hundredweight in pieces.
There isn't that much fine opaline in the world, of course, but it got
me wondering exactly how he was planning to use it." She frowned. "I
still haven't worked it out."

"Maybe he's planning to lock it up somewhere and wait for the vampires
to come and look for it," Razi suggested. "That would be one way."

Kembe snorted. "Maybe. But come, you must be tired. Samila has set out
hammocks for you, I trust? Yes? Good. And there's lamb, of course, with
onions and apricots." She waved her hand at the piece of glass, which
dimmed obediently, and shooed us out of her study. Razi stepped aside to
let her lead the way.

Kembe blinked at us as we shouldered our packs. "Did Samila not take
those, then?"

The left side of Razi's face twitched in a half-grin. "She probably
thought we'd be eager to see you."

"Sss..." Kembe sighed through her teeth. "That woman..."

Razi's grin spread to the other side of his face. "It's all right. It's
good to see you."

Kembe grunted. "This way." She pointed over my shoulder and drew a
circle in the air, then turned to lead the way. When I glanced back, the
cloth-and-frame door was gone---only a featureless patch of wall
remained. Magic...

\* \* \*

The wind room ran the whole length of the house. Its two end walls were
grilled, so that the breeze could blow through it. The windows looking
down on the street had grilled windows. It wasn't until years later, in
Ensworth, that I saw windows with glass in them.

Four hammocks hung in the room, though there was room for a dozen more.
The two nearest the door had boxes and bags beneath them, so Razi and I
put our backs under the other two. Kembe waited while we changed from
walking boots into slippers, then led us back the way we had come. I
glanced back, just to check. The door was still there.

"Do you still have your turtles?" Razi asked her as we walked along.

Kembe gave Razi an odd look, then glanced at me and smiled. "Of course.
Probably one or two you haven't seen. I need to wash my hands
anyway---please, be welcome." She handed a small silver key to Razi,
nodded at me, and left us.

I followed Razi to the middle strut of the house. Its two rooms had no
windows. Razi paused outside the door, and for once his face was very
serious.

"You're not to come in here by yourself," he told me. "Magicians are
very jealous of their privacy." I nodded. He unlocked the door and
stepped aside to let me enter.

The room was lit by two glowing pieces of glass, like the ones in Razi's
study. It took a moment for my eyes to adjust to the dim light. When
they did, I gasped. A dozen turtles were crawling around on the floor.
The smallest was the size of my hand; the largest, as big as the circle
of my arms. They were all made entirely made of multi-colored
glass---not just their shells, but their legs and heads and tails, too.
They looked like overturned bowls of gems, slowly dragging themselves
around the room.

Razi laughed. "They're her greatest prize," he told me. "The miners find
them every once in a while. No one knows what they were made for, but
they're still down there, crawling around the old palace. Kembe started
collecting them years ago."

I squatted down to touch the shell of the nearest one, then hesitated.
"Do they bite?"

"I don't know," Razi said. "I've never tried to find out."

I got down on my hands and knees so that I could look right through the
shell of the biggest one. It swiveled its head to glare at me, then
stumped forward again on its splay feet. Two of the smaller ones were
trying to climb over each other. The soft light from the glowing pieces
of glass shone amber and emerald in their shells.

I straightened up. "What's in there?" I asked, pointing at the lacquered
wooden cabinets on the far side of the room.

Razi shook his head. "Whatever it is, it's none of our business. Come,
let's eat."

Everyone sits together when the Aphsi eat. There's no point putting some
people at one table, and some at another, when everyone can *drome*
everyone else anyway. In Kembe's house, though, there were three tables:
one for Kembe and Razi, one for the servants, and one for the
apprentices. The servants were Samila, her grandniece, and a
silversmith, who was staying in the house while he did some work for
Kembe. The silversmith stood and raised his palms as we entered. Kembe
acknowledged him with a nod, but didn't interrupt the story she was
telling Razi. Samila and her grandniece cooked and served while we ate.
They didn't get their own dinner until the rest of us were done.

It turned out that I was one of the apprentices. The other was Kembe's.
His name was Thomas, and he was the strangest human being I had ever
seen. His skin was milky white, but mottled with tiny brown flecks
called "freckles". His eyes were blue, and his hair was orange---not
brown, or hennaed, but orange. He laughed at the look on my face, *la*,
just as you're laughing now.

"I'm from Ensworth," he explained after we touched palms. "Kembe
apprenticed under my mother at the king's court, so she sent me down
here to learn glass and silver. Are you hungry?"

I nodded. He raised his hand and beckoned, *come here*. I half-expected
the leg of lamb on the spit over the hearth to rise up into the air and
float over to us. Instead, Samila's grandniece sliced two thin leaves
from it with a knife the length of my forearm. She laid them on a wooden
platter with some bread and sliced melon. Thomas smiled at her as she
set it on our table, the kind of smile you give someone when you want to
say more than just, "Thank you." She was smiling too as she turned away.

Thomas peppered me with questions while we ate. What was Medef like?
Really? That small? Why, he would have gone mad growing up in a place
that small. Even Ossisswe was just a country town compared to Ensworth.

What about books? Did I like to read? I nodded. "Ah, wonderful. So few
people here do, you know. What's your favorite book?"

I swallowed a mouthful of melon. "*The Prince of Cats*."

"Really?" Thomas laughed. "But that's just a fairy tale for children!
Have you read *Travels Among the Anuat*? Or *Mstislav's Diary*?" I shook
my head. I'd never even heard of them.

"Well, you're lucky. Lady Kembe has a good library. Of course, you'll
only be allowed to read the normal books." He took another piece of
bread and used it to pick up a slice of lamb. I wondered if I was
supposed to eat like that, instead of with my fingers. Razi hadn't told
me what city manners were like.

"How long have you been here?" I asked him.

"Almost two years." He swallowed. "I think I've made tremendous
progress. Still have a lot to learn, of course." He raised his eyebrows,
but I just nodded and kept eating. As *nif* as I was, I knew what he was
thinking. Razi and I weren't magicians, but Kembe treated us as though
we were important (which non-magicians rarely are, in magicians' eyes).
So, what exactly were we?

Samila's grandniece returned with a small plate of almond cakes. "Thank
you, Masika," Thomas said. She smiled, but only at Thomas.

"Have you met Eimin?" he asked her. "No? Eimin, this is Masika."

"Hello," I said.

"Hello, and be welcome." Her voice was soft. She had a round face, and a
flat little nose, and---*la*, she was pretty, that's enough to say. And
I knew the look in her eyes. She looked at Thomas the same way the
carter's son had looked at Hediyeh.

I dreamed that night. I don't know whether it was an omen, or whether it
was because I had been thinking about Hediyeh and the carter's son. It
could just have been the rich food and strange hammock after a month of
dry desert rations and hard ground. Razi stayed up to talk to Kembe, and
Thomas and the silversmith to finish work that could only be done in the
light of certain stars, so I had the wind room to myself. I lay awake in
my hammock, listening to the breeze, and to the occasional voice on the
street outside. I felt so lonely. Even after everything that had
happened, I just wanted to be back in Medef. I knew my brothers and
sister wouldn't miss me, not really. I was the youngest by five years,
so we didn't play together much when I was growing up. But I missed
them, and my mother and father, and my own hammock.

When I fell asleep, I dreamed about Hediyeh and the gargoyles. I had
followed her and the carter's son into the hills south of the village.
They knew I was behind them---the *drome* of my anger and shame must
have been as strong as the smell of burning dung. Even so, they couldn't
shake me off. Razi had taught me how to follow wild goats through these
hills---Hediyeh and her stumble-footed boyfriend were easy by
comparison.

In my dream, though, we weren't in the hills. We were in the old quarry
in Ossisswe. They were climbing toward the rope bridge over our heads. I
was right behind them, so close that I was just about to reach out and
grab Hediyeh's ankle. Then the gargoyle screeched. Hediyeh screamed. And
suddenly I was falling, face-down, spread-eagled, with my arms and legs
spread wide. The wind blowing past me was full of sand, like a
gritstorm. I felt it strip the meat from my bones, then erase the bones
themselves, until I was nothing but a shadow, falling.

I woke with a gasp. The room was dark. My cloak had slid off me onto the
floor. I pulled it back over myself, then lay there and stared at the
ceiling for a while. I could hear Razi and Kembe in the courtyard. My
heart slowed. I stared at the ceiling a little while longer, then sat up
and slid out of the hammock. I padded over to the window on bare feet.
The moon was up, three quarters full. Suddenly I couldn't bear to be
inside a moment longer.

An L-shaped bolt held the window grill in place. It slid out with barely
a whisper. The grille swung outward on hinges that squeaked no louder
than a pocket mouse. I hopped up onto the windowsill and leaned
backward, holding on to the sill with one hand.

A thick wooden beam stuck out of the adobe wall an arm's reach above me.
The Aphsi would have called it a "granny post". A pulley would be hung
from it when something heavy had to be raised to the second floor.

I was about to pull my head in and close the window when I heard a soft
*clink* on the roof. I froze. Nothing, nothing... *clink* again. I
brought my feet up beneath me and stood up, still holding the window
frame with one hand. The top of my head was only a foot below the edge
of the roof. My heart was pounding again. There was definitely somebody
up there.

I had to stretch to reach the granny post. The old pine beam's edges
were smooth with age, but the top had split lengthwise. I hooked my
fingers into the crack, then stepped into thin air.

Razi hadn't let me climb without a rope until I could do twenty chin-ups
with either hand. This was a lot easier than that: I got my other hand
onto the beam, then pulled myself up slowly. "Don't grunt," he had told
me, over and over again. "Take a deep breath, let it out, then lift.
Keep your mouth open."

The post scraped against my chest. I swung a leg over it, moving as
quietly as I could. A moment later I was crouching on top of the beam,
pressed against the house wall. Not for the first time, I wished that my
eyes were on stalks, like a sand lobster's, so that I could peek at
whatever was on the roof without lifting my head. But if wishes were
griffins, beggars would fly... I started to straighten up slowly,
silently, willing myself to be invisible.

"Eimin! What are you doing?" I jumped and nearly fell off the beam. Razi
was glaring at me from the window.

"Someone's on the roof!" I told him. As I spoke, I heard feet race
across the tiles. I scrambled onto the roof, just in time to catch a
glimpse of something too skinny to be human jump off the other side.

"Eimin!" Razi barked, but I was already running.

The edges of the overlapping tiles were sharp on my bare feet. I was at
other side of the roof in two breaths, but the stick figure I had seen
was gone. The street below was empty in the moonlight.

I spun around at the sound of footsteps, but it was only Razi. He had
his knife in his hand. "What happened?"

"I heard someone on the roof," I said. I didn't see any point explaining
why I had opened the window.

"Could you see who it was?"

I shook my head. "I think it was a haunt. Shorter than you, taller than
me, and as thin as rope."

"Bare feet?"

I hesitated at the odd question. "I don't know. I didn't see."

"Razi! What's going on here?" I spun around again. Kembe stood behind us
with her arms crossed. I couldn't see any stairs or a ladder, and I was
pretty sure she hadn't scrambled up the granny post. Magic...

"Eimin saw a haunt on the roof," Razi told her. "Didn't get a clear
look. It jumped down into the street."

Kembe uncrossed her arms and walked to the edge of the roof. She studied
it carefully, humming softly under her breath. I was startled to see a
pair of feathery wings tattooed on the back of her neck.

Eventually she shook her head. "Nothing," she growled. "Not a damn
thing."

"What about your watchers?" Razi asked.

Kembe shook her head again. "Asleep." She nodded at me. "Which is lucky
for your young friend. We'd be sewing your head back on right now if
someone hadn't charmed them."

"I'm sorry," I said automatically.

Kembe grunted. "We'll talk again in the morning," she said to Razi.

Razi nodded and raised his palms. I raised mine too, but Kembe was
already gone. I hadn't seen her vanish. I had just looked away for an
instant, and missed her going.

It turned out that there was a trap door in the roof, with a ladder
leading down into the storeroom next to the wind room. Razi inspected
the trap door, and the storeroom, but if he saw anything, he didn't
share it with me.

I lay down in my hammock again a few minutes later. The night had grown
cold, as nights in the desert do. I pulled my cloak over my chest and
closed my eyes.

"Good night, Eimin," Razi said softly from the next hammock.

"Good night," I replied. I closed my eyes and went to sleep.

\* \* \*

Samila sent Thomas and I to the market the next day. "Get some jalapenos
and cactus fruit," she ordered. "And the master needs some fine black
thread, and some more of that powdered red glass. Silk thread, mind, not
cotton. And don't come back 'til it's time for dinner. Masika has a hard
enough time keeping her wits on her chores without you two making goggle
eyes at her. And don't get into any trouble!" I couldn't remember making
goggle eyes at Masika, but age brings with it a kind of clairvoyance.

Thomas and I walked down to the market. He wore white trousers, a
knee-length white coat with red and gold embroidery on the breast, a red
and gold turban, and sturdy walking sandals. The embroidery on his
jacket twisted itself into a new pattern every few heartbeats. It seemed
showy and frivolous, especially compared to my plain desert white, but
it didn't attract more than a few admiring glances in Ossisswe.

The day was only an hour old, but the sun was already a hot yellow-white
haze in the sky. Lots of other people were on the zigzag road already,
on their way to shop before their mid-day siesta. Most were dressed as
simply as Samila, but a few wore rich robes or jeweled rings. Some of
the men had dyed their moustaches and beards to match their clothes.

When we reached the bottom of the hill Thomas led me into a shaded alley
barely wide enough for two people to walk side by side. His legs were
longer than mine, so I had to take an extra step now and again to keep
up with him.

"If we go this way, there's only a couple of courtyards where we have to
be in the sun," he explained over his shoulder. I was too busy
memorizing the twists and turns of our route to say that I didn't mind
the sun.

The alleys between the buildings were kinked and tangled like an old
man's beard. Donkeys with clay jars of water on their backs jostled
against people selling parrots that had been trained to call for help if
they smelled fire. Around another corner, another partot, a gifted one
with rings on its claws, was reading aloud a business letter that some
illiterate camel trainer had brought him. The alley cut left, then went
straight again, like a pocket mouse trying to dodge a hawk.

Suddenly we were in a courtyard, sunlight dazzling on white-painted
walls around us, earth packed down as hard as stone beneath our sandals.
The half-a-dozen bored camels roped to the harness bar on the wall
ignored us, placidly re-chewing whatever they had eaten for dinner the
day before.

Thomas plunged back into the cool dark alley on the other side of the
courtyard, then ducked under a pair of freshly dyed carpets that someone
had hung up to dry. Another corner, and we were under a long cloth
awning that kept the heat off the street between two parallel rows of
storefronts. Freshly mined glass lay in piles on the tables in front of
the stores. People spoke loudly to be heard over the *chink chink chink*
of the glasscutters' tiny hammers. Here and there I saw people holding
pieces of glass up in front of beeswax candles to check their color and
quality. A few pieces were of such high quality that they shone with a
light of their own, green-blue or amber yellow even after the candle was
taken away.

Thomas slowed to a walk, breathing hard. I suddenly realized that he'd
been trying to shake me off in the alleys. "This, is just, one of the
smaller, markets," he said, waving a hand. "The big one, over by, the
caravanserai, is ten times, this size."

I nodded, then danced to one side with a yelp. A black, hairy mountain
brushed passed me. "Pardon," it muttered.

"What was that?" I gasped.

"What? Oh, that was a bear." He grinned maliciously. "They're all over
where I come from. That one must have come down as a guard with one of
the caravans. Pretty hot in all that fur, I bet."

I nodded again. Thomas's grin faded. "You don't say much, do you?" he
said.

I shrugged. "Not much to say." Razi had warned me of this. "Remember,"
he had said, "Aphsi means *aphe sessi* in the old language, 'quiet
people'. They called us that because we don't have to gabble all the
time like they do. Everyone you've ever known can *drome* whether you're
listening to them or not. In Ossisswe, you'll have to say something back
to them to let them know." Then he made me practice the stupidest
exercise he'd ever given me. He told a long story about three snakes and
the eagle, and I sat there making a grunting noise, "Uh huh, uh huh,"
every few sentences, just to let him know that I'd heard him, and wanted
to hear more.

"I think I'd rather be quiet," I told him when we were done.

Razi shook his head. "You can't be," he told me. "You have to learn to
be anyone, from anywhere. If you just sit there like a stone, people
will notice you, or even guess that you're Aphsi. And then what kind of
a spy would you make?"

Thomas and I walked at a slower pace past the sheets and blocks of
glass. "Actually, Lady Kembe hardly ever buys glass in the common
markets," he told me. The awning rustled and snapped in the breeze over
our heads. "There's another market on the other side of town where they
sell special glasses. I actually have a few pieces of my own. Still
haven't decided what to make with them."

"How about a turtle?" I suggested.

Thomas frowned at me. "How do you know about his turtles?"

"Razi showed me," I told him.

Thomas's frown deepened. "He shouldn't have done that. He'll be in big
trouble when Lady Kembe finds out."

"She was there. She gave him a key."

Thomas looked at me the same way he had at dinner the night before. What
was Razi, exactly? And what did that make me? "Well, don't ever go in
there on your own," he warned me. "Not even I'm allowed to do that." The
frown stayed on his face all the way to the market.

The market... I thought it was crowded when we arrived the evening
before, but that was a gentle breeze compared to the gritstorm of noise
we walked into that morning. People were selling figs and silver rings,
painting portraits to be sent to loved ones far away, telling stories,
telling lies, fixing sandal straps, and painting small designs in henna
around children's ankles. They were talking, shouting, pleading,
bargaining, whining, telling jokes... It was a ten times bigger than the
gathering market in Medef, and a thousand times noisier. It was as if
everyone was trying to let everyone else within earshot know exactly how
they felt about the bargain they were being offered, or the bargain they
were offering. It seemed---it seemed almost wasteful, as if they were
spilling water onto the sand instead of pouring it into a jar to drink.

Thomas elbowed me in the ribs. "A lot bigger than you're used to, I
bet." I closed my mouth and nodded, then skipped sideways to avoid being
run over by two boys carrying a roll of carpet. As I did so, I bumped
into the woman who had been passing on my other side.

She grabbed one of my shoulders to steady herself. "Careful!" she said.
She was about my mother's age, lean and dark like all desert people. Her
hair hung down in dark braids streaked with gray, and she wore a striped
robe.

"Sorry." I raised my palms in apology.

She glanced at Thomas, then back at me, and let go of my shoulder. "No
harm done," she said, and went on her way.

"A lot of them think I have some kind of disease," Thomas confided in me
with amusement. "Because of my skin. There was a waterseller the other
day who wouldn't serve me, because she was afraid I'd make her other
customers sick." He grinned at me, obviously pleased with himself. When
I didn't say anything, his grin stiffened a bit. "So anyway, I put a
little spell on her jugs so that they'd smell like honey to flies. I
figured that way she wouldn't have any customers to worry about."

I nodded, but still didn't speak. Thomas's grin finally slipped away.
"The spice market's this way," he said brusquely. I nodded again and
followed him. I hadn't been trying to be rude. I had just been trying to
remember where I had seen the woman before. It had been at the festival
market in Medef, I was sure of that. But was she Aphsi? Or had she been
there from somewhere else?

Ossisswean coins are round, with the city's name stamped in a circle on
one face, and its maker's name on the other. Each one has a small hole
through the middle, so that people can string them together. Fifty
coinweight of brass buys a coinweight of silver; twenty silver buys a
gold, or four goat kids, or a month's worth of bread for a small family.
I had three silvers and two dozen brass on a leather string in my
pocket. Razi had given them to me, and shown me how to wrap a scrap of
cloth around them so that they wouldn't jingle.

Thomas carried his coins in a small leather wallet tucked inside his
jacket. He didn't seem to mind their jingling. He bought Samila her
jalapenos and cactus fruit at adjacent stalls with a couple of brass
coins each. "Here, put out your arms," he told me. He piled the prickly
red fruit against my chest, then hung the strings of jalapeno peppers
around my neck.

"Now, black silk thread..." he mused. "That'll be in Embroidery Lane.
Come on." He set off again at a fast walk. I took one step, then
stopped. What did he think I was, a pack camel? I'd been the butt of
enough jokes growing up *nif* in Medef to know when someone was trying
to make me look foolish.

I went back to the stall where Thomas had bought the cactus fruit. The
old man who ran the stall was stripping the worst of the thorns from the
fruit with a long one-edged knife, like the one Samila's grandniece had
used the night before.

"Excuse me," I said. "I want to buy a bag."

He paused long enough to give me the same up-and-down once-over that I'd
seen Razi use. "Leatherworkers are mostly over there," he said, pointing
with the tip of his knife. "Of course, cloth would be lighter, and
cheaper, even if it wouldn't last as long. I'd get cloth if I were you.
Try down that way. Should be an old woman with a green shawl, about this
tall, big pile of belts and bags and panniers for camels and the like.
Give you a good price, too, she will."

"Thank you," I said. I shrugged my shoulders instead of showing him my
palms. As I turned to go the way he'd pointed, I heard his knife resume
its methodical *whack*, *whack*, *whack*.

The old woman turned out to be his wife. I discovered this when she
asked me what her old fool husband was doing sending her cactus fruit,
couldn't he sell them himself, oh, I was there to buy a bag from her,
why hadn't I said so, she had just the thing, hmm, no, that one would be
too small for market days, though it would be all right for morning
errands, did I think I was going to be going out on market days? Oh, I
didn't know? New in Ossiswe, then, was I? With one of the caravans, or
in with family? Neither? Oh, of course, I must be starting an
apprenticeship, unless I was coming to try my luck in the glass mines?
No? Good, good, that was horrible work, really, underground all day,
always having to worry about cave-ins, or monsters, and speaking of
monsters, had I heard about her sister's husband? No? Oh, no, of course
not, not if I'd just arrived. Well, he was a glass miner, a crew boss as
a matter of fact, twenty-two years he'd been in the digs, and just two
months ago, they found a whole new corridor, someone had blocked it up,
must have been ages ago. They thought they'd found their lucky, didn't
they, so they kept their mouths shut, no reason to let the guild know,
just so they could take half of it, was there? So anyway, they spent a
week clearing all the old rubble out of the way, hard work that was,
though of course not as hard as cutting glass would have been, and did I
know what they found when they were done? No? No one had told me?

She looked around suspiciously. People were walking past on all sides,
talking to one another or hurrying to finish their shopping. She still
had the first bag she had picked up in her hands.

"Scorpions," she said in a loud whisper. She nodded. "Glass scorpions,
some of them as big as you or me, and all of them as fast as birds. My
sister's husband got out of there all right, but one of his crew didn't,
no not at all, and another had a piece like this taken out of his calf."
She held her thumb and forefinger apart to show the size of the wound
the scorpion's claws had inflicted on the hapless man.

"What happened then?" I asked.

She shook her head. "Well, they had to go tell the guild then, didn't
they? Can't keep something like that to yourself, not unless you want to
wind up on your way to Ini Bantang with a collar around your neck. They
went and told the guild, and the guild sent its own down there all
kitted out with nets and hammers and a couple of magicians to sniff for
trouble, smashed every one they could find. But do you think they got
them all? No, nor I. Scorpions are fast, as fast as they are wicked.
I'll bet you the price of this bag there's a few of them still down
there, just waiting for the next poor soul who wanders by."

"So how much is the bag?" I asked. She seemed to be at the end of her
story, and the cactus fruit were very prickly in my arms.

The "I told you so" look disappeared from her face. It was replaced with
a stony, disapproving glare, like Samila's. "For you, twenty," she told
me brusquely, rubbing her thumb against the first two fingers on her
right hand. I pulled out my money string, undid the knot, and counted
out twenty thin brass coins. My ears were burning. I knew I'd said
something wrong---even a *nif* like me could tell that---but I didn't
know what it was, or whether I should apologize.

I set my coins at one end of her stall. She put the bag at the other, so
that we could both pick up what we were owed at the same time. I've
heard people from elsewhere laugh at that since, but that's just how
desert people do business. Instead of thanking me, the woman just
slipped the coins into a pocket in her robe and turned around to
re-arrange the bags piled behind her. I just wanted to take back the
last two minutes and start over. I'd liked her story---I thought she was
funny. I didn't know what I'd said wrong.

I turned to go and find Thomas. "Whoa!" he said, throwing up his hands
as I almost ran him down. He laughed at my startled face. "So what did
you get?" he asked.

I held up the bag, then handed it to him. He held it open while I dumped
the prickly cactus fruit into it. "How much did you pay?" he asked.

"Twenty brass," I confessed.

"Twenty!?" he exclaimed. "That's robbery! That's theft! What did she
start at?"

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"How much did she ask for first?"

"She asked for twenty brass," I said helplessly.

Thomas eyed me suspiciously. "And you paid it? Just like that?"

I nodded, feeling like a fool. Razi had explained haggling to me,
but---well, there wasn't much point among the Aphsi. Thomas sighed.
"Come on. I got the thread, and the best place to get Lady Kembe's glass
is over by the wishing well. There's usually some other apprentices over
there too."

*\* \* \**

*+With the apprentices; embarrassment of being shut out; making a fool
of himself; Razi growing worried about strange goings-on at Kembe's;
Eimin mentioning the Aphsi; revelations about Eimin's apprenticeship.*

*\* \* \**

Samila sent us down to the market again the next day. She didn't seem to
notice the surly looks Thomas gave me, or that I spoke in single
syllables, if I spoke at all. We ate our breakfast of dates, goat
cheese, and flatbread in silence, then headed down the hill into the
city, me with my bag slung over my shoulder like a duellist would wear a
lady's scarf around his neck.

We were after rope that day---not silken climber's rope, or woven glass
for Kembe's magic, but plain old twisted hemp that Samila could use to
bundle up old rugs for storage. Thomas had a newly-made silver knife
that needed a leather grip as well, and we were under strict
instructions not to return until the afternoon.

We trudged down the hill in the mid-morning heat. A thousand reflections
of the sun dazzled my eyes. I followed Thomas down a narrow alley,
across an empty square floored with blue and green glass flagstones, and
into another alley.

The sun couldn't reach this one. It was dark and cool, and smelled
faintly moist. As we rounded the corner, the smell turned sour. It grew
worse with every step, until my head was swimming with the reek of camel
piss. There's nothing like it, nothing in the world---it almost feels
like someone is rinsing out your nose and ears with cold vinegar.

Another corner, and we were in the leatherworkers' yard. Great stinking
vats of yellow "curing juice" stood against one wall. Three whole
sheepskins were stretched on racks beside them. A middle-aged woman was
scraping the hair from them with a semi-circular knife. Next to her, an
older woman was punching holes in another hide with an awl and hammer.
Still more hides lay in a heap on the ground beside her. A sandy-colored
cat with a torn ear was sniffing at them. It tensed as Thomas and I
approached, then shot away into the alley on the other side of the yard.

Thomas showed the knife to the woman with the awl. I was too busy trying
not to gag to pay attention to what he said, but she shook her head and
pointed us the way the cat had gone. Thomas thanked her and followed the
cat. He didn't look back to see if I was following, but I did anyway.

I wondered where we were going, but if he wasn't talking to me, I saw no
reason to talk to him. The alley was short, but the smell had somehow
disappeared by the time we stepped out into the next yard. It was
larger, and opened out onto a real street. The hides here were cured and
neatly stacked.

The woman who greeted us had the same flat nose and round face as the
one Thomas had spoken to. He showed her the knife; she weighed it
appreciatively in her hand for a moment, then nodded. As she and Thomas
picked out the piece of leather that would be used for the grip, I
watched people walk by in the street. Most were from the Karaband, but
there were a few from the Bantangs with their hair pulled back in long
ponytails, and one or two whose lighter skin and hair must have come
from the Nine Marches or Garheim. I saw a gifted camel, too. It wore a
judge's white sash around its neck, and was deep in conversation with a
skinny old man wearing a darker sash over his shoulder.

"The end of the week, then," Thomas said. He and the leathersmith raised
palms to each other.

"Now, does your friend need something as well?" she asked. I tore my
eyes from the street scene just in time to see Thomas roll his eyes.

"I have no idea," he told her. "Hey, Eimin---do you see anything you
like?" He waved a hand to take in the stacks of hides and the
leathersmith's bench.

I shrugged and shook my head. Thomas turned back to the leathersmith
with a sardonic smile on his face, inviting her sympathy. "I don't know
what the rest of the Aphsi are like, but this one's as quiet as a
stone."

I kept my eyes on the leathersmith's bench---Razi had taught me not to
jump when I was startled---but I saw her face harden. She tapped the air
with the tips of the first two fingers on her left hand against bad
luck. "The end of the week," she repeated to Thomas. "Come alone." She
turned back to her bench.

The smile on Thomas's face was ugly. If any real Aphsi had been around,
they would have wrinkled their noses at my *deroma*. It probably stank
as badly as the barrels in the curing yard behind us.

"That was stupid," I said as Thomas and I stepped out into the street.

"What do you mean?" he asked innocently. "You really *are* very quiet,
you know."

"I meant paying that much for getting the knife done," I said. "You're
supposed to haggle, remember?" I hitched my bag higher up on my
shoulder. He opened his mouth, then closed it without saying anything.

The caravaneers' market was on the other side of the city. It took us
almost half an hour to walk there. Thomas stopped twice to buy water,
and once to gossip with another apprentice. I stood two paces away each
time, like a dark shadow in a white robe. We passed underneath a couple
of streets along the way. They weren't really streets, just wide glass
walkways connecting buildings one or two stories up, but it felt strange
to see people walking by over my head. It was like being one of the fish
in *The Prince of Cats*, looking up at the bottoms of the ships sailing
by.

All of a sudden I had another pang of homesickness. A day's walk south
of Medef, you could see a shark trapped in the glass, just a few feet
below the surface. Two days past that, if you pushed yourself hard, were
the remains of a smugglers' sloop. Everything above the glassline had
been used for firewood long, long ago, but the keel and lower boards
were still stuck in the glass.

I had seen the shark once, with my oldest brother. It was the only time
we did anything special together. I'd never seen the sloop, though.
No-one went that far out on the glass without a good reason. There are
no springs or wells in the glass, no succulent cactus or thumbroot to
squeeze a mouthful of water from if you twisted an ankle.

I probably would have gone eventually, I think, just as I had gone to
see everything else. It gave me a chance to practice the things Razi
taught me, and to be away from people for a while. I know my mother
worried when I was away on my own, but I always came back.

The day would have come when I didn't, though. Even without Hediyeh and
the carter's son and the gargoyles. The only *nif* who stay among the
Aphsi their whole lives are the slow ones, the ones who accept being
crippled and are content to be hunters or butchers, the jobs that real
Aphsi can't do. Some of them even get married and have children of their
own---being *nif* isn't passed on like the shape of your nose or the
size of your feet. Some *nif* don't seem to mind being what they are,
but I wasn't one of them. That's why I was Razi's apprentice.

I was in a foul mood by the time we reached the caravaneers' market. It
should have cheered me up---traders from all over Cherne haggling and
gossipping and trading stories, camels of every imaginable shape and
size, sacks and crates being packed and unpacked, people pulling
two-wheeled carts loaded down with rolls of cloth or blocks of glass. It
should have cheered me up, but it just made me feel worse.

"Here," Thomas said. He handed me a dozen brass on a string and pointed
at a gaggle of people and goats a few yards away. "Samila wanted fifty
arms of twine, and twenty of strong cord. Why don't you see how good
your haggling is? I want to see if I can find a new hammock."

"I'm not your servant," I muttered under my breath, but only after I'd
taken the money and he'd walked away. Why did he need a new hammock? The
ones in the wind room were fine.

The knot of people Thomas had pointed me at fell silent as I approached.
One was a man in his early twenties, with his hair cut close to his
scalp and a bronze ring in his ear. I held up my string of coins. "I
need rope," I said. "Fifty arms of twine, twenty of strong cord."

He raised his eyebrows, then grinned. It was a good grin. "What a
coincidence," he said. "I have rope, but need money. Come, let me show
you what we have." The conversation started again around us as he led me
over to a piece of canvas stretched out on the ground. He had rope, all
right, and a pair of leather stirrups, a few jars of sesame oil, a
wooden box the size of my hand with criss-cross grooves etched in its
lid, and all the other odds and ends that traders try to rid themselves
of between trips.

A little girl, six or seven years old, was playing with a couple of
carved wooden camels next to the canvas. She looked up as we came over.
"Grappa says you have to get four more bags of dates," she told the man.

"Did Grappa say why he couldn't get them himself?" he asked. He stooped
over and scooped her up, then turned to me with her upside-down in his
arms.

"Here," he said. "Ten brass. No, wait, eight. Eight, and I'll throw in a
pair of camels." The little girl was giggling, saying, "Put me down, put
me down." He just hefted her like a sack of barley.

One of the women behind me spoke up. "Best be careful, Youssein," she
said. "Your father gave her some sugar eggs for lunch."

"Whoops!" The man turned the little girl over and put her back on her
feet. She threw herself at him. "Do that again!" she ordered.

"Not now, not now," he said. "I've got a customer. Later." He was still
grinning, and to my surprise, I realized that I was grinning too.

His name was Youssein, and he was from---well, he was from all over.
"Can't even remember where I was born," he said as I picked through the
twists of twine and loops of cord on his canvas. "Not that anyone
remembers being born, of course, but---hey! Hey! Easy with that one!"
Another man, younger than him but older than me, was wrestling with one
of the goats' leads.

*+Conversation (must get the feeling that Youssein likes being who he
is); Thomas interrupting, having bought a silk hammock for Masika;
Youssein can do something with the hammock to make it a better gift, but
it needs sized; they'll have to return the next day.*

\* \* \*

I really didn't want to go back to the market with Thomas, but I didn't
know what else to do. Razi was gone when I woke, leaving behind only a
cord with knots that meant "safe", "return tonight", and "stay out of
trouble". That last one wasn't part of standard rope talk. He made it up
for me soon after I started my lessons with him. We made up other signs,
too, for chess moves. We played a whole game that way once. I tracked
him in the morning until I found a piece of rope with his move knotted
into it, then tried to hide mine where he couldn't find it. I was
unhappy so often when I was young that I sometimes forget the good days,
like that one. It's important to remember them, though. They are part of
my story too.

So, the market. I would rather have sat in the shade of Kembe's
courtyard, reading one of the books from her library, but Samila would
have none of it. "That girl will get nothing done if you hang about,"
she said sourly. Masika was tidying up in the cellars, so I wasn't sure
how we were supposed to interfere, but I'm sure Thomas would have found
a way. "And I need cinnamon for the sweet tonight." She shooed us out
like an innkeeper getting rid of an unlucky guest.

Funnily enough, Thomas didn't seem as unhappy at the prospect of another
day with me. He wore a yellow silk coat over dark blue trousers, and a
broad-brimmed hat that matched his trousers perfectly. He was even
whistling as we left the house.

"Wait," he said when we reached the first zigzag in the street. He
leaned against the wall and grinned smugly.

"For what?" I asked. He just kept grinning.

A minute passed. A few servants from the houses around us passed as
well, on their way to the market. Some of them nodded at us, or rather
at Thomas. He nodded back, whistling the whole time.

I was only half-surprised when Masika came around the corner, breathless
and smiling. Thomas straightened up. "What kept you?" he teased.

"The turtles were out," she said. They touched palms. "Hello, Eimin."

"What?" Thomas's grin vanished. "All of them?"

"I don't know. I wasn't sure if I should..." She faltered under his
probing gaze. "What's wrong?"

"Why would she...? Oh, never mind." His grin returned as he offered her
his arm. "Shall we? Coming, Eimin?"

I could have said a dozen things, all of them rude. Instead, I fell in
step behind them. It was going to be another beautiful day in Ossisswe.

Thomas and Masika ambled down to the market with me in tow. Most of the
conversation consisted of Thomas explaining the world, and Masika being
impressed. The domed roof on that house was clearly modeled after
Garheim-in-Garheim's Sun Palace. And those shawls must be from Barra
Bantang, but hmm, the quality wasn't the best, was it? The court ladies
in Ensworth wouldn't have them as saddle cloths. On and on he went. I
have to admit, he did know a lot, and was a very witty speaker. I found
myself hoping that he would get something wrong---*la*, not so that I
could point it out, just for the satisfaction of it. But he didn't, at
least not so far as I could tell.

*+Stampede in the market; Eimin saves Youssein's little sister.*

\* \* \*

I don't think Thomas got a trial. I don't think he ever had a chance to
explain his side of things, not that it would have helped. Ossisswe was
proud of its magicians, but suspicious, too. As long as they kept order
amongst themselves, the city let them look after their own affairs.
Kembe might have discussed what had happened with her peers in one of
those reflective pools magicians sometimes use to talk to one another.
She might just have chosen his punishment on her own.

Razi scowled that whole evening. "Stupid, stupid, stupid," he said, pity
making him angry. "This is the third time he's done something like this
in less than a year. She has to make an example of him." He shook his
head. "I'm going to go sit for a while. You probably should too."

I went back to the wind room, rolled up my cloak to make a cushion, and
sat on it. Legs crossed, hands resting on my knees, eyes
closed---breathe in for a count of seven, hold for three, out for seven,
wait for three, over and over. It was the first lesson Razi taught me.
We practiced over and over, month after month, until I could find that
calm place in moments.

"It's not enough to be quiet." We were sitting under a lemon tree half
an hour's fast jog up the hill behind Medef. The Crystal Sea was
painfully bright under the early morning sun. "And it's not enough to
stay out of sight. You have to have as little *deroma* as a flea. You
have to let the world blow through you, like the wind blowing through
your spread fingers."

"But why?" I asked. I didn't have a cushion that day. The rocks were
sharp underneath me, and I was still out of breath from running uphill.
"The *bataw* can't *drome* me anyway."

"Don't call them that," he said sharply. "They're not 'lacking', any
more than you or me. *La*, and who says that there will never be Aphsi
in a caravan? Or Aphsi guests in a house you find it necessary to enter?
Or that you will never have to spy on Aphsi?" He grinned suddenly. "Or
that you will never want to sneak up on a certain girl and her friends,
*la*, and teach them what surprise feels like?"

In for seven, hold for three, out for seven, wait for three... It took
me months to learn how to calm myself, and almost another year until I
could find that quiet place while I was running, or climbing, or
hunting. Especially hunting---it's hard not to feel triumph, and sorrow,
when your arrow catches a rabbit or a wild goat. But it was worth it.
*La*, it was worth it, just to hear Hediyeh shriek when I snuck up
behind her and whispered, "Bah!" in her ear.

I didn't feel sneaking up on anyone that evening in Ossisswe. I should
have felt like a hero for saving a little girl's life. I didn't even
like Thomas, really. But still, it was a long time before my heart and
my breathing slowed, and my thoughts stilled.

Samila served dinner that night. Kembe and Thomas didn't join us, so
Razi and I sat with the silversmith. "Sad business," he said, and who
could disagree?

Razi had business in the city afterward. I went to the library after
dinner to look for the books that Thomas had mentioned the night I met
him. I found a well-kept copy of *Travels Among the Anuat* and took it
back to the wind room. For two hours, I lost myself in a strange land of
ice and snow, filled with magicians who drew their power from the bones
of their ancestors. I paddled between glaciers in a sealskin kayak with
the nameless author, saw great white bears (I knew what a bear looked
like now, at least), spoke with whales, was ambushed in the Anuat
rising, nearly executed as a spy by Garheimmen soldiers... *La*, I
forgot all about Thomas for a while. I forgot about the stampede in the
market, too, until I couldn't keep my eyes open any longer and had to
set the book aside. I saved someone's life today, I thought. My mother
would be proud. Then I fell asleep.

\* \* \*

I woke in the gray light that comes before dawn. Razi lay in his hammock
two strides away. I rose silently, dressed, and headed for the door.

"Get something to eat," Razi said without opening his eyes. "I'll be
down in few moments." I padded down the whitewashed steps and slipped
into the kitchen. The fire had dwindled to red coals in the hearth.
There was no smell of fresh bread, and no sign of Samila or Masika, but
there were dates in a glass jar, and a cloth bag full of almonds. I took
my scavengings out to the rear courtyard to wait.

Razi had a turban on when he came downstairs, and a fine white coat that
hung to his knees. I handed him the last of my dates. "Is it going to be
bad?" I asked.

He nodded. The scowl of the previous evening was gone, replaced by an
unsmiling solemnity. He took a handkerchief from his coat to wipe his
hands---Razi, with a handkerchief---then raised his voice. "It is time,"
he said clearly.

A door opened on the upper level behind us. I twisted around. Thomas and
Kembe came down the stairs, Thomas in front. He had shaved his head.
Instead of his usual finery, he wore a simple white shirt and trousers
that only reached half-way down his calves. He was barefoot, too.

"Thank you for doing this," Kembe said to Razi. Razi raised his palms to
her and bowed his head.

"Turn around," he ordered Thomas. He tied Thomas's wrists with his
handkerchief. "Now follow me."

Thomas walked beside Razi the whole way down the hill. He must have
known he was supposed to walk two paces behind, but pride is pride.
People pointed and stared as we passed them. Everyone in Ossisswe knew
what had happened, of course, and what was about to happen. A few
jeered, but Razi's glare was enough to shut them up.

Down the hill and through the narrow streets to the Unsunken Tower, the
only part of the old palace tall enough to still be above ground.
Several hundred people waited for us---merchants and beggars, tanners
and goldsmiths, and yes, a few magicians.

Razi's glare wasn't enough to stop the jeering now. He made a fist with
his right hand, then pointed down, signalling me to stay with the crowd.
He led Thomas to the wooden rack that stood in front of the tower.

The gifted camel I had seen two days before waited for them there, as
solemn in his white sash as Razi was in his turban and coat. As, I
suppose, Thomas was in his shirt and trousers. "Is this the prisoner?"
the judge asked. His voice was as high-pitched as a child's.

"This is." Razi untied Thomas's wrists.

The judge turned to face the crowd. "By recklessly endangering the lives
of others, this man Thomas has brought himself here," he pronounced. "He
is to end this day whole, but beyond that, no charge is put upon you."
He turned his sour gaze on Razi. "Affix the prisoner."

Straps of varying lengths hung down from the rack, so that it might
accommodate prisoners of all sizes. Razi slipped two of them over
Thomas's wrists and cinched them tight. Two more from the rack's lower
bar went around his ankles, so that he couldn't kick people who came
close.

"Is the prisoner prepared?" the camel asked. Razi looked at Thomas, but
Thomas only stared fixedly at the ground a few feet in front of him. He
was trembling slightly.

"The prisoner is prepared," Razi confirmed. A few people cheered. Razi
raised his palms to the judge, then to the crowd. Someone whistled
loudly. Someone else whooped.

The judge nodded to the crowd. "The prisoner is yours."

I watched the first few take their turns. One man had a crock full of
dung from what must have been some very sick goats. Another man, so
drunk that he staggered, emptied his bladder onto Thomas's legs,
laughing the whole while. Two women in matching robes worked as a team.
The first smeared honey on his head. The second---*la*, I have seen
stranger things sold in markets since then than a jar full of flies, and
uglier looks on people's faces than her happy sneer, but the memory
still sickens me.

"Have you seen enough?" Razi asked quietly. I nodded. Thomas was weeping
with shame.

"It's awful," I said.

"He brought it on himself," Razi said, angry and sad together. "Remember
that. He could have killed that little girl. Or you. He deserves this."

"I don't mean that. I mean *them*. They're enjoying it!" I spat on the
cobblestones at my feet. "I'm just glad I can't *drome* them."

"Me too." Razi sighed. "I'm not really in the mood to give you a lesson
today. And I have to be back here at sundown to take him home. Here." He
handed me a money string with fifty silver coins on it. "It's from
Kembe, for the caravaneers. It ought to be more than enough to pay for
some new stalls."

I weighed the coins in my hand. It was more money than I'd ever held in
my life. A sudden thought made me look at the crowd again. "How come
they're not here?"

Razi shrugged. "This isn't their way of doing things. Nor mine." He spat
on the cobblestones as I had done. "I'll see you this evening."

\* \* \*

*+Eimin visits Youssein; we find out that Youssein is an orphan, which
makes Eimin reveal that his parents split up, in part (he feels) because
of his condition; we discover that Thomas has traded his interest in
women for power at Kembe's insistence.*

\* \* \*

The Aphsi have six principal villages. There were nine once, but three
were abandoned a century or more ago when their wells dried up. My
mother and Razi and I camped next to one on our way to Ossisswe. Its one
street and empty houses were even quieter than the open desert.

Medef will probably be like that one day. There is a little less water
in the oasis every year. When it finally runs dry, the families who live
there will trek across the Crystal Sea to the Great Plains that lie
north of Ini Bantang and Barra Bantang. Many Aphsi already live there
beside its escaped slaves and wild men. Who knows? The day may come when
Aphsi are as rare in the Karaband as they are here. We may become a
legend, as elephants are to the Anuat, or dogs are to everyone now that
they are gone.

*La*, listen to me. You can tell I don't want to go on with my story,
can't you? But I have to. I have to practice the parts I'm ashamed of,
so that when my day comes, and I have to tell it all one last time, they
will be ready too.

So: the Aphsi have six principal villages. Each takes its turn hosting
the spring gathering. Lawsuits are announced then, and the previous
year's suits judged. There is a market, which may be the most honest
market in the world. There are the games: running, singing, whose chili
tastes best. And of course, it is a place where young people can meet
one another, while old people renew their acquaintanceship and recall
when they first met.

I was fourteen that year. The gathering was in Medef. People began
arriving two weeks before the equinox to pitch their tents in the best
spots, where the hillside south of the village curved to form a natural
amphitheatre. My father had moved into his brother's house that winter,
but he still came by to press dates with my mother and I. Boxes of them
were stacked in my bedroom, each one holding five layers of dates
separated by layers of vine leaves.

A motley band of traders from Qara showed up two days before the
equinox. A handful had been to Medef before. The rest were curious,
footloose, or down on their luck in equal measure. They brought the
usual wares: cloth and carpets, sandals and spices, steel knives, tin
whistles, and books.

The books were in a box on the back of a two-wheeled cart whose driver
had the thickest arms I had ever seen. He barely glanced at me---my
mother was looking for a new frying pan, and *la*, he was sure he had
one somewhere. Perhaps she would like to consider these belts, or this
bracelet, while he looked? If he had been Aphsi, he would have *dromed*
my mother's quiet amusement at his sweet talk.

And if his son had been Aphsi, he would have *dromed* what lay behind
Hediyeh's quick smiles and sidelong glances. He was as tall as his
father, and as solid. He even wore a sleeveless leather vest to show off
his arms. He almost tripped over his own tongue when Hediyeh and her
friends showed up. They ignored me, of course. They had known me all
their lives, and I knew them well enough to know what game they were
going to play.

"Is this *real* gold?" Hediyeh gasped, picking up a hairbrush whose gilt
paint was scratched through.

"Oh, no," the carter's son said. "If it were, I would have given it to
you the moment I saw you."

"*La*, that's so sweet. You must have to give away so many hairbrushes,
if you give them away that easily."

The carter's son licked his lips. He actually licked his lips. "To tell
you the truth, I've never given away any. I've never had good enough
reason, until now." Hediyeh fluttered her eyelashes at the compliment.
Her friends covered their mouths to hide their giggles. They could
*drome* what he could not. She was playing with him like you'd play with
a kitten, twitching a piece of string on the floor and then pulling it
away when the kitten pounced.

*+Romance and mockery*

I looked around. Hediyeh and the carter's son were nowhere to be seen.
Two men standing near me suddenly stopped talking and stared at me. A
woman a few feet away gasped and whirled around, *droming* the anger
boiling up inside me. I heard someone say, "What's wrong? What's
happening?" but I was already running.

I dodged through the crowd, jumped over a bench, rage pounding in my
ears. Some children shrieked as I ran past them. They had probably never
*dromed* anything like what I was feeling. They probably had nightmares
about it for weeks.

I knew where Hediyeh would be taking him. A path led from the
amphitheatre up to the pasture where the village's goats grazed. If you
kept going, it snaked between two steep hills to a little valley. The
ruins of an old mansion nestled in the valley like a small gem lying in
the palm of your hand. If you followed the path past it, up the valley's
other side, you could see the Crystal Sea stretching out to the horizon
below you. When the sun was setting, the glass burned with a thousand
shades of red and gold and orange. More than a few couples in Medef
would swear that it was the most romantic place in the world.

I had been there many times, of course, but always on my own. I knew
that Hediyeh had gone there with her friends and a few boys my age in
the past, to play games of "I dare you", but that was different. That
was just for play. They were Aphsi. He was *nif*, like me, and I didn't
think she was playing any more.

So I ran after them the way Razi had taught me to, breathing in for four
strides and out for another four, always looking two breaths ahead. I
was used to running with a pack on my back. I felt like I was flying
along without it. I didn't know what I was going to do when I caught
them. Would they be kissing? Would he fight me? I grimly hoped that he
would. I could beat him, I knew that. He was bigger than me, and
stronger, but I was as fast as a rattlesnake, and thanks to Razi, I knew
more than a fourteen-year-old should about how fragile the human body
was.

The goats watched me run by. A pair of optimistic vultures circled
overhead. The two girls watching the goats waved at me, then faltered as
they caught my *deroma*. One whispered in the other's ear, pointing at
me. I pushed myself to run even faster as I reached the other side of
the pasture.

Sharp, dry crags rose on either side of me. I was in shadow, climbing
higher with every step, sweating freely. Suddenly I broke into the
light. Five more breaths, forty more paces, and there was the little
valley. There were the ruins of the mansion.

And there was Hediyeh, hand-in-hand with the carter's son, ambling along
as if all was right with the world. I saw her stumble, then twist around
to look back at me. Out here, away from the village, my *deroma* would
have carried like the stench of burning dung.

The carter's son looked back too. He must have asked her a question,
because she smiled and shook her head. Then she took his other hand in
hers, stood up on tiptoes, and kissed him.

I'm *nif*. I can't *drome*, but I've been told that despair *dromes*
like ash tastes. The funny thing is, I know people who like a bit of ash
on their bread. They say it gives it more flavor. Other people will pay
good money for cheese so ripe that it would stain silver. I think
Hediyeh was like that. I think she liked the *drome* of my despair, my
anger, my sullen disappointment with who I was. She must have relished
what she *dromed* just then.

The first stone I threw fell short. The second shattered on the rocks
two paces from them. The carter's son took a step toward me, but Hediyeh
grabbed his arm and tugged him the other way. He hesitated. She tugged
again. I could imagine what she was saying. I could practically hear the
tone of her voice. The sun was about to set. There were dozens of little
caves and crannies in the hillside. Wouldn't it be fun to find one and
hide? To listen to me wander around looking for them, while they
squeezed together in the cool darkness and watched the sun go down?

They ran up the path side by side, hand in hand. I picked up another
stone and chased after them. I had no idea what I was going to do when I
caught them.

*La*, and I never found out. The path turned sharply left beneath a
slight overhang. They were thirty paces in front of me when they reached
it. They must have realized that I was going to catch them, because the
carter's son let go of Hediyeh's hand so that he could turn to face me.
Hediyeh ran on a few more steps before turning around herself.

She screamed an instant before the gargoyle hit her. She would have
*dromed* sooner---soon enough to avoid the cave where it had made its
nest---if its patient hunger hadn't been masked by my anger. But she
didn't, so it did what gargoyles do. It attacked.

The gargoyle's claws tore through her shirt and the muscle in her upper
arm. She screamed again as it knocked her sideways off her feet. It was
half her height, but easily twice her strength. It fastened onto her
shoulder and lunged for her throat.

My stone caught the edge of its right wing. The gargoyle screeched and
threw itself toward me. I dove forward and rolled underneath its lunge.
Hediyeh was screaming. The carter's son was screaming too---the gargoyle
had hit him full on. I pulled my knife from my boot and tackled it from
behind.

Its neck was as long as my forearm, long enough for it to twist around
and bite my wrist. Yes, that's the scar, right there. If it had been
fully grown, it would have taken my hand off. And if it had been my
right hand, well, I probably wouldn't be here telling you this story.
But it was my left, the hand I had grabbed it with, which left my right
hand free to drive my knife into its throat.

Except gargoyles are as tough as the rocks they hide in. I only
scratched it. It thrashed in my arms, its beak still clamped around my
wrist. I was screaming too. I kneed it hard in the side and felt
something crack. It let go of my wrist and tried to shake me off. I
kneed it again before I fell. I must have broken some of its ribs,
because it only managed to fly a few paces before crashing to the
ground.

I staggered after it. It glared at me and hissed. Its left wing stuck
out awkwardly to the side, but there was nothing wrong with its arms or
legs. I scooped up a stone with my right hand, weighed it, and threw it
as hard as I could. It snapped the gargoyle's right wing just below the
shoulder. It tried to run away then, but it couldn't, not with its wings
dragging. My second rock broke some more ribs. The third one finished
it.

The carter's son was dead. *La*, what more can I say? The gargoyle bit
through the pulse vein in his neck, here. Hediyeh was trying to get to
her feet when I reached her.

"Get away! Get away!" she shrieked.

"Hediyeh!" I grabbed her good arm with mine. "Hediyeh, *la*, it's me,
it's Eimin. You're bleeding. I have to bandage it."

"Get away!" she sobbed. She sank to her knees. I felt faint myself. I
couldn't hold anything with my left hand. Have you ever tried to take
your shirt off one-handed? I saw a clown do it once, years later.
Everyone laughed. It looked ridiculous.

It wasn't ridiculous then. Hediyeh was unconscious by the time I pulled
my injured arm through the sleeve. I rolled her on her side and wrapped
it around her shoulder. The dry earth was sticky with her blood. Sand
fleas were already swarming to it. If I didn't cover her wound, they
would burrow into it.

Razi trained me to jog for an hour or more with a full camping pack.
Hediyeh was heavier, and didn't have shoulder straps. I pulled her arm
to sit her up, then ducked under it, lifted her, and staggered off.

The stars were up by the time I reached the goat pasture. My knees were
scraped bloody from the times I had tripped, and Hediyeh had a bruise on
her forehead---I hadn't left enough room going around a corner. It
hadn't woken her, which scared me more than the drips of blood we were
both leaving on the trail.

The two little girls were gone. The boy who had taken their place had a
girl with him, someone he had met at the gathering. They must have
*dromed* me coming up the path. I don't know. I just remember their
hands and voices. They wanted to take Hediyeh from me, but I wouldn't
let them, not until I went down on my knees one last time. The girl ran
toward Medef for help. The boy---I think his name was Aureb---put water
in a pan to boil over his fire. I tried to tell him what had happened,
but it all came out jumbled. I finally gave up and watched him clean the
blood and dirt off Hediyeh's face and shoulder. He didn't offer to look
at my arm. I didn't ask him to.

*La*, so people came, my mother and father and Hediyeh's and a dozen
others with bandages and medicines and a stretcher. I explained again
what had happened, more coherently this time I think.

"Somebody has to tell the carter," my mother said quietly when I
finished. "About his son."

"And somebody has to talk to Razi." My father cleared his throat. "About
ours."

I left Medef with Razi and my mother three weeks later. I didn't get a
chance to tell the carter how his son had died. He packed up and left
the morning after it all happened.

I did talk to Hediyeh, though. The evening before I left, she was
sitting on the edge of the well pool. Her arm was in a white sling
embroidered with all her friends' names. They surrounded her like a rich
smuggler's bodyguards, glaring at me as I crossed the square.

We looked at each other, Hediyeh and I, neither of us speaking. Finally
I shrugged. "I'm sorry," I said.

"I know you are," she said. "The whole village can *drome* how sorry you
are." She spoke like a princess. I waited for her to say something else,
but she didn't, so I raised my palms to her and walked away.

\* \* \*

*+Something else happens here---can't have Masika making a play for
Eimin quite so quickly. Need to advance the main plot somehow. (Need to
figure out what the main plot [is]{.ul}.)*

\* \* \*

*+Masika comes on to Eimin.*

Razi and I went into the rear courtyard afterward. He didn't even try to
keep the grin off his face. "You know, back when I first started legging
around, I always carried three books with me. The first was always very
serious---something like *Trade and Despair in the Third Dynasty*, or
*Epic Voyages of the Bantang*. The second was always love poetry, the
soppier the better. And the third was always, always *Tick Tock Moon*,
just in case she had children."

"In case who had children?" I asked because I knew I was supposed to.
That was how Razi told stories. He put out some bait, like an odd fact
that didn't seem to have anything to do with anything, then waited for
you to pick it up. He never pressed his story on you if you didn't take
the bait, but *la*, try getting him to stop talking if you did.

"Why, whoever I was looking at," he said, grinning even more widely than
before. I wanted to dump a slops bucket on his head. Instead, I
unwrapped the practice swords and handed him one.

He leaned it against the wall and started stretching. "Sometimes went
for months without taking them out of my pack," he grunted. "But then
there'd be a traveling scholar from Garheim who had overheard some
choice gossip on her way through Seyferte. Or some locksmith would have
a daughter with eyes dark enough to drown the sun. Or the house next to
the house I wanted to get into would belong to a widowed seamstress with
a six-year-old who wouldn't go to sleep without a bed-time story. That's
when the books came out." He reached over his head, as if to scratch the
back of his neck, then pushed his elbow down with his other hand to
stretch out the muscles on that side.

I was sitting on the pavement with my forehead on my knees. "So you used
them to seduce women?" I asked.

Razi chuckled. "You can't really seduce people," he said, switching
arms. "All you can do is help them talk themselves into doing something
they know they shouldn't. Send a woman honeycakes and roses, *la*, you
might as well paint a message on a board and set up a stall. But if you
just happen to be sitting out some morning with an interesting book in
your lap, and a smile on your face, well, any number of things can
happen. Any number of things..."

"And you're telling me this now because...?"

He picked up the practice sword and tossed it from hand to hand.
"Because she's pretty, and frivolous, and there's nothing wrong with
that. Nothing wrong at all." He flourished the sword with a swish. "Life
doesn't have to be serious all the time, Eimin. And even if you don't
feel that way, you shouldn't look down on people who do. Now, shall we?"
He flourished his sword again.

I rolled backward into a handstand, then forward onto my feet, snatching
up my own sword as I went. He parried my first thrust and cut at my
legs. I skipped backward, raising my palm to him for a pause. "I thought
you couldn't read?"

For a moment the laughing look slipped from his face. "I can't," he
said. "Used to, but I got into a tight spot once, and had to trade it
away."

I lowered my hand. "Like Thomas?"

He nodded. "Yes. But I think I got a better deal than he did. Now,
*avant!*" He lunged, checked, stepped in, lunged again. I beat his
wooden blade to one side and cut at his arm. He twisted out of the way
and came at me again.

We spent the whole morning in the courtyard. We dueled, then practiced
cuts and parries, then dueled some more. If I had been a soldier, or a
nobleman's son in the Nine Marches, I would have done that much and more
every morning. Razi had told me many times just how short my life would
be if I ever came up against someone with that kind of training. "Face
to face with a blade this size, *la*, that's not for the likes of us,"
he said. "Hide, if you can, or sneak away, or best of all don't be
caught in the first place."

We usually practiced other things: punching and kicking, climbing ropes
(which you can do in at least six different ways, depending on how thick
it is, whether it's wet, and what you're carrying), and sleight of hand.
I can still do a few of those tricks---see? If I put a coin here, and
then close my fingers over it and breathe on my fist... Ah, yes, where
*did* it go? Do you think it's in your ear? No? Well, I do. Look! *La*,
no, it's not magic, it's just a trick.

Just a trick, just one of the many that Razi taught me. I can read pages
that are upside down, and hide a rolled-up note inside a melon without
marking the skin, and dozens of other odd things. But that morning was
just swordplay.

Finally Razi stopped. "All right," he panted. We had both taken off our
shirts and sandals. Drops of sweat glistened in his chest hair like
morning dew. "Give me your sword." He took my wooden practice sword, and
his own, and set them on the bench against the wall. Then he pulled a
battered wooden case out from beneath the bench. He undid the knot that
held the lid shut, opened it, and lifted out two swords. Real swords,
with polished steel blades and hilts wrapped in pebbled leather.

"Try this." He handed one to me. The blade was only as wide as three of
my fingers at its base, but it was a lot heavier than I had expected. I
flourished it slowly, watching the light spark off its edge. It was the
first real sword I had ever held.

Razi passed me a pair of worn leather wrist guards with metal plates
sewn into them, and a leather collar similarly protected. They smelled
of old sweat, like a well-worn saddle. I buckled them on. Razi put his
on as well.

"Now, gently," he cautioned me. "Gently. Feel its weight. Feel how it
swings." Then he grinned, as Razi as ever. "But make it look good. We
have an audience."

I glanced up in time to see Masika duck her head back into a doorway on
the floor above us. I could have run Razi through right then. Instead, I
raised my sword, tip high, arm bent slightly at the elbow, and began to
follow the slow, smooth pattern than he set.
