---
title: "A Base Case for Empirical Software Engineering Research"
date: 2018-03-13
---

I've been
[saying](http://www.amazon.com/Making-Software-Really-Works-Believe/dp/0596808321/)
[for](https://vimeo.com/9270320)
[years](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FtKO619O5g0) that programmers
ought to pay more attention to empirical studies of software
engineering and base their practices on evidence rather than strong
opinion.  I was challenged on this three years ago when someone asked
me to cite studies showing that bug trackers are a better way to
manage backlog than shared spreadsheets.  I couldn't, and still can't.

I also can't find any studies showing that version control is a better
way to manage software projects than mailing files around or dumping
them in a shared folder.  I "know" it's true—I wouldn't work on a
project that didn't use version control—but then again, my aunt "knew"
that putting colored crystals on her chi points would relieve her
arthritis.  As far as I can tell from outside the Great Paywall of
Academia, nobody's ever actually done the study.

That's kind of embarrassing, but it's also an opportunity.  The
biggest open problem in empirical software engineering research is
measuring productivity: lines of code per hour and story points per
sprint are easy but meaningless, and we haven't agreed on anything
more sophisticated.

So here's my proposal: let's have a bunch of graduate students design
and publish the experiments they would run in order to determine
whether version control actually is better than alternatives.  I'm not
asking for them to actually run the experiments, but rather to make
their ideas about measuring productivity explicit and public so that
we can compare them.

And yes, once their ideas have been debated, I would like to see a few
of the experiments run and their results compared, because this will
help us figure out which of their metrics actually capture what we
intuitively think of as "productivity": if metric X doesn't show that
groups using version control outperform groups that don't, I think we
can safely discard it.
