---
title: "Eimin in Medef"
template: page
fiction: true
---

People believe many different things about what happens to you when you
die. In the north, the people of Ruuda spent six hundred years fighting
to free themselves from undead monsters who stripped the flesh from the
bones of the living to sustain their unnatural existence. Sunshine and
courage were often their only weapons, so I suppose it is not surprising
that many of them believe that the souls of the righteous dead rise up
to fuel the sun, so that it can shine down on us, and keep us safe,
forever.

In the west, on the other hand, the farmers of the Regimental Kingdoms
bury their dead to thank the earth for its bounty. Just as flesh becomes
soil, then barley, then flesh again, so too, they believe, does the
world fashion new spirits out of old.

The pirates of Ini Bantang and Barra Bantang believe in rebirth too,
except they believe we are reborn as ourselves, to live our lives over
again. This is why they say *im awa pha ta* whenever anything bad
happens. It means, "Oh no, not this again." And I met a tiger once, from
Thind, who told me that when we die, we're dead, and all the rest is
just monkey foolishness. But later he asked me to ring a bell in memory
of a friend of his, so perhaps tigers can be foolish too.

But in the Karaband, where I was born, people believe that when they
die, they get to tell the story of their life one last time. It doesn't
matter then if it's a heroic story filled with great deeds and poetry.
All that matters is whether the person telling the story enjoys hearing
it again.

We Karabandi think it's important to know what our stories are going to
be like while we are still living them, so every once in a while, we go
to someone and say, "This is the tale of me." Sometimes it is best if
the listener is a stranger, a once-met on the road or a patient ghost.
Sometimes the story will only make sense if the listener is someone in
particular---a loved one who has been wronged, or someone who remembers
how sour-sweet the first dates of a new harvest tasted.

And sometimes, when the story that needs telling is particularly
difficult, people seek out someone who is so good at listening that they
have become famous for it. You can find such listeners in almost any
town or caravan. We may have some other profession---cobbler, bookster,
even thief---but what we really do is hear people out. We try not to
judge, and we never repeat any of what we're told. We just help people
find out what their lives mean while they are still living them.

The other thing we listeners do is teach people how to tell their
stories. It can be hard if you've never done it before---our lives teach
us to hide our feelings, even from ourselves, and digging them up can be
harder than mining diamonds. I find the easiest way is to tell people my
own story first, so if there is any tea left in the pot...? And perhaps
a little more of the honey? Thank you.

So: my name is Eimin, and this is the tale of me. I was born in Medef,
on the eastern shore of the Sea of Glass. The people of Medef are not
like people elsewhere. They are Aphsi: they can *drome* whether you are
happy or sad, just as you can smell what is cooking before you go into
the kitchen. Aphsi mothers can tell that babies are hungry or tired
before they start to cry. Aphsi traders always know whether the person
they are bargaining with is honest. And Aphsi thieves are the best in
the world. They can *drome* when a street vendor is sleepy, or whether a
guard is paying more attention to the women washing their hair in the
courtyard below him than he is to the sound of tiles being pried loose
from the roof over his head.

But not me. I can't *drome*. I am *nif*, like you. I kicked and kicked
when I was inside my mother because I couldn't *drome* her trying to
soothe me. When I was a baby, I cried whenever my mother or father left
the room. I couldn't *drome* that they were just around the corner. And
when I was older---*la*, but I will speak of that in its time.

No one knows why the Aphsi are what they are. Some people think we have
always been that way. Others blame it on the great spells of the
Uncertain Angels' last war, that turned Lake Karaband into the Sea of
Glass. And others, well, I will speak of that in its time too.

Let me first tell you what it was like to grow up *nif* among children
who could *drome*. They---the other children my age in Medef---used to
play a game with me called "surprise". Sometimes, when I was watching an
anthill, or practicing my letters, they would sneak up behind me and
shout, "Bah!" I would jump, and they would all laugh. They couldn't
imagine what it was like to not know that someone was behind them. (Did
I mention that Aphsi make good guards, as well as good thieves?)

To tell the truth, I enjoyed the game sometimes. It was exciting, and at
least it meant the other children were paying attention to me. More
often, though, it just made me angry. I would tell them to stop, or run
to my mother and get her to tell them. They would, but only long enough
for me to go back to my ants or my letters. Then they would sneak up
behind me again, "Bah!"

I still have a scar---here, on the ball of my thumb---from the time
Hediyeh and her friends surprised me while I was carving a new pawn for
Razi's chess set. I was ten; the cut went right down to the bone.
Hediyeh had to go without food for two days as punishment, and her
parents gave my mother a chicken and a spool of fine green thread to
apologize, but as far as Hediyeh and her friends were concerned, that
just made it my fault.

In a way, though, that cut is where my story begins. That cut, and the
talk I had with Razi that evening. Razi was a few years older than my
mother, and *nif* like me. He showed up in Medef two or three times a
year, lean and dark, scissors and wire and odd tools in his pack, a
waxed paper bag of sweets in his pocket. I thought he was a tinker, or
maybe a hunter. A lot of *nif* wind up being hunters, or butchers, since
killing anything with more of a soul than a snake makes most Aphsi ill.

Razi came to our house just as my mother put the last stitch into my
thumb. The two of them sat and talked for a while in the shade garden
while I moped around under the awning out back, picking at my new
stitches and feeling sorry for myself. I tried to hear what they were
saying, but couldn't.

When they were done, Razi came to fetch me for a game of chess. "Here,"
he said, "Let me have a look at that."

"It's nothing," I told him sullenly. "Let's just play."

He shook his head. "Show me," he insisted. I shrugged and held out my
hand. He inspected the four black stitches, then nodded.

"They used to do that to me too, you know. When I was your age." He took
his embroidered chessboard out of its leather sleeve and unrolled it on
the little table outside our front door, then sat cross-legged on the
ground beside it. I sat on a stool across from him.

"Did you ever cut yourself?" I asked as I set up my pieces.

"No, but look." He pulled up his right sleeve. A beaded old scar ran
from his elbow to his wrist like a thick worm track on his skin. "I got
so tired of them sneaking up on me that I climbed a date tree once to
get away from them. I sat up there for, *la*, it must have been hours,
just watching people come and go. I still remember how peaceful it
felt."

He laughed. "It was so peaceful that I fell asleep! And *hup*, down I
fell. I broke my arm so badly, they had to give me poppy juice and cut
it open to straighten out the bones."

"I'd break my arm myself if it would stop Hediyeh and the others from
playing stupid tricks on me," I grumbled. I picked up a black pawn, put
my hands behind my back, then held them out to him, fists closed.

Razi didn't tap one. Instead, he stroked the air with two fingers
against bad luck. "You should be careful what you ask for," he warned
me. "*La*, and even more careful what you offer in return."

I knew that tone of voice, and the look in his eyes. All of a sudden I
was angry, even angrier than I had been when I cut my thumb. What right
did he have to pity me? He was as *nif* as I was! "Well, are you going
to choose or not?" I asked, waving my fists above the little table.

He reached out as if to choose my left hand, then shot both his hands
forward and grabbed my wrists. "Open up," he ordered.

"Ow!" I opened my hands. The black pawn I had taken from the chessboard
lay in one. Another black pawn, the one I had spent the day carving, lay
in the other.

Razi laughed. "I think I'll take white," he said, letting go of my
wrists.

"How did you know?" I asked.

He grinned and pointed at the chessboard. "You forgot to pick up a white
one," he told me. "If you're going to try to trick someone, *la*, you
must learn to think more than one move ahead." He scratched the side of
his nose. "For example, think about---what's her name? Hediyeh?"

"I'd rather not," I said sourly. I had spent hours carving that pawn...

He shook his head. "Eimin, just because you can't *drome*, it doesn't
mean you're deaf and blind. Look at pocket mice. They can't *drome*
either, but have you ever tried to sneak up on one? They're always
listening, always sniffing the air. If you listen that hard, and learn
to pay attention, no-one will ever be able to sneak up on you. And if
you learn to be as still inside as a piece of glass, then one day maybe
you will be able to sneak up on them." He raised his hands, palms facing
me, meaning, "What I have just said is true."

"But how?" I was so frustrated that my voice broke.

He lowered his hands. "I can teach you, if you want." He shrugged his
shoulders and twisted his right hand around, all in one smooth motion.
Just like that he had a short, sharp knife in his hand. The blade was
blackened, but sunlight glinted on its edge. I stared at it like a
pocket mouse staring at a snake. Razi was more than just a wandering
*nif* tinker, and he was offering me far more than I had realized I was
bargaining for.

---

Five years later, Razi sat cross-legged in front of his tent beside the
lemon grove, weighing feathers in the tin pans of a little balance.
"Have you eaten?" he asked without looking up.

"Yes. And I brought date bread for lunch. *Umma* made it yesterday."

He nodded. "Good." He took one of the sand-brown feathers from the
balance and trimmed it with his knife. "Canteens are in the tent. We'll
need one each, and a spare." The balance leveled. Razi took the feathers
from them, then removed two more from the bag beside him and set them on
the scales.

By the time I had filled the canteens and returned, Razi had trimmed a
dozen feathers to be exactly the same weight. He laid them flat in a
folded square of paper so that they wouldn't be crushed. "Finish those
later," he said, standing and stretching. He stooped and pulled his bow
case from his tent. It was as tall as I was, a long tube of hard brown
leather. A second tube, shorter and fatter, was his quiver. Any feather
on any arrow in that quiver would level the balance with any other.

The last thing he took from his tent was a dark green bottle wrapped in
woven leather plaits. Its stopper was a sword hilt with a plain leather
grip. Razi slipped his belt through a loop in the leather so that the
bottle hung over his left hip. "All set?" he asked me.

I nodded. My bow was slung over one shoulder in the padded cloth case my
mother had made for it. I had fifteen arrows, each with a barbed steel
head the size of my thumb, and my machete.

"Good," said Razi. He clapped me on the shoulder. "Let's go hunting."

Razi led us south, skirting the grounds of the old palace and then
turning inland toward the watchtower. We played chess as we walked, each
telling the other a move every fifty paces. It's harder than it sounds.
Not only do you have to keep the position in your head, you have to
think of a plan while you're counting paces. It was fun, but it was also
another of Razi's exercises, training me to keep track of time and
distance while I was worrying about other things.

Time and distance are what the desert is about. How far do I have to
travel? When am I going to run out of water? That morning, after he
said, "Checkmate," and we were just walking, they defined my thoughts,
too. How much longer would I have to stay in Medef? How far could I go
when I left? The furthest I'd ever been was Uef. It was a tenth the size
of Medef, just thirty families living around a spring three days away. I
wanted to see Ossisswe, and Ensworth, and Ruuda, and Ini Bantang, and,
oh, the whole world. I wanted to see what a city looked like, a city
full of *nif* like me. I wanted to have adventures, so that I could come
back to Medef to tell stories and have girls like Hediyeh blush and
giggle when I walked by, the way they blushed and giggled around the
*nif* traders who came for the examination fair every autumn.

I put one foot in front of the other, taking four steps for every three
of Razi's. The sun was half-way to noon when Razi turned east. We were
circling around the big hill so that we could come up to the watchtower
from the side closest to the glass. I tried to figure out his plan while
we walked. We would reach the tower mid-afternoon. That didn't make
sense: at that time of day, the breeze would carry our scent straight to
the gargoyles. Unless...

"*La*, am I to be the bait?" I asked.

Razi grinned without looking at me. "No, I am."

We reached the beach an hour later. It was an eerie place. A thousand
years of dry wind had scoured most of the sand away, leaving a glass
shelf that rippled with the shape of ancient waves. Pieces of that shelf
had cracked and broken over the years, littering the rock below with
sharp-edged shards ready to cut through even the sturdiest boot sole.

Razi pointed. "Down that way there's a path, by three rocks that look
like a mother goat and two kids. Do you know it?" I nodded. "Follow it
all the way up, then work your way back down behind them. I'll come at
them from below."

I hesitated. "How will I know when you're ready?"

He grinned again. "You'll know. *La*, you'll know."

It took me half an hour to make my way up the hill, and another half an
hour to work my way back down. I moved from rock to bush, never taking
more than a dozen steps at once, scanning the sky for slow-circling
wings before slipping to the next bit of cover. I tried to keep my mind
clear, to think only about the next few steps. I was just a pocket
mouse---no, not even that. I was nothing more than a wind-blown scrap of
tumbleweed.

I was about five hundred paces from the watchtower when the first
gargoyle launched itself into the air. She didn't start flying right
away. Instead, she plummeted earthward down the side of the tower for a
moment to build up speed, then snapped her wings open. I heard the faint
*crack* a double heartbeat later. By then, she was already rising on a
warm updraft with her wings spread wide.

I waited until it was moving away from me along the shoreline before
moving again. I crouched behind the waist-high remains of an old wall
that might once have been the side of a house and slipped my bow out of
its case. I had waxed the bowstring that morning when I was unable to
sleep; there, in the day, I cursed the faint honey smell that still
lingered. I slipped one loop into the catch at the bottom end of the
bow, braced it, then bent it and hooked the other end of the string in
place in one motion, just as Razi had taught me.

I swallowed a last mouthful of water and set my canteen down in the
wall's narrow shadow. I still had half a piece of date bread left, but I
couldn't have eaten it then for its weight in pewter. I pulled the
drawstrings at my wrists and ankles tight and knotted them, so that my
sleeves and pantlegs wouldn't catch on anything.

The second female launched herself from the tower. As she rose to follow
the first one, I slipped around the end of the ruined wall and sprinted
for the candelilla bush I'd chosen as my next patch of cover. I had
hunted jackrabbits and sand gulls this way, watching for the moments
when my prey looked away, inching closer a few paces each time.

Suddenly one of the gargoyles stooped, yipping at the other. I held my
breath. It must be Razi. I slipped two arrows from my quiver, put one
between my teeth, and slowly raised my head.

The third gargoyle, the male, took wing just as I pressed myself against
the candelilla's dry leaves. His wingspan was easily twice that of the
other two, and when he answered their call, its voice boomed instead of
shrieking. He flapped its wings twice to gain height. The two females
circled him as he climbed, all three calling to each other.

Razi broke cover. He ran straight for the tower, his bow in both hands
like a spear for balance. One of the females screeched and plummeted
down toward him, arms outstretched. I notched my arrow. Razi threw
himself sideways at the last moment, stumbled, rolled over, and somehow
was up on one knee to let fly an arrow I hadn't even seen him draw. It
punched through the skin stretched tight across the ribs of the
gargoyle's wing.

The other female was right behind her, herding Razi toward the waiting
male who would make the kill. I sighted, leading him, time and distance
made reflex by long hours of practice. Razi was running again, trying to
get to the base of the tower. The second female swooped across his path
to cut him off. He checked himself and doubled back three quick paces so
that she overshot, but the male was waiting for him. Razi jabbed upward
with his bow as he went down on one knee again. The male stumbled in the
air as it hit his wing, but one taloned hand raked Razi's scalp.

I let my first arrow fly just as the male started to climb. It passed
harmlessly behind him. I pulled another from my quiver. I could taste
the one between my teeth, my snapshot arrow. I could see blood on Razi's
face.

He had two arrows out himself, one in his teeth, one strung. As the
first female dove, he fired, drew, fired again. The second hit her
shoulder, cutting some vital muscle or tendon. Her wing crumpled, and
she tumbled sideways to crash into the ground.

The male bellowed, circling five stories above Razi's head. I drew,
exhaled, and let fly. My arrow hit him square in the chest. The impact
knocked him sideways in the air. My snapshot arrow struck his leg a
moment later, but I think he was already dead. He turned over once as he
fell.

The second female shrieked and banked away. I saw Razi aim, then lower
his bow. She was too far away, moving too fast. I ran down the hillside.

He was wiping blood from his face with his sleeve when I reached him.
"Are you all right?" I asked.

He glared at his sleeve, then at me. "*La*, do I look all right?
Stupid... Stupid of me. Where's the spare canteen?"

"You have it," I said, pointing. He glared at me again, then at the
canteen hanging at his hip. His look softened. Suddenly he laughed.

"So I do. *La*, so I do." He handed me his bow, unstoppered the canteen,
and splashed some water onto his face. "Gaaah... I'm a mess."

Something rustled behind me. I whirled around. The female that Razi had
shot was struggling to her feet. Her right wing hung bent at her side.
She chittered, clutching feebly at the arrow that had passed through the
complicated double joint where arm and wing joined body.

Razi wiped some more blood from his face. "Here, give me that." He took
back his bow and drew an arrow. The female just stood there on her
short, bandy legs, one wing folded, the other hanging, watching with
all-too-human eyes while Razi sighted carefully and put an arrow through
her heart.

---

We walked back to the lemon grove in somber silence, leaving the
gargoyles' bodies where they were to feed the desert. They had been
taking Grappa Uzman's goats; he had suggested building a fire in the
base of the tower to drive them away, but Razi had said no, they would
just come back when the smoke was gone. And anyway, how would we fuel
the fire? Nothing near the tower would burn---would *sri* Uzman like to
spend the next month carrying dried camel dung?

If someone else had said that, Grappa Uzman would have puffed up his
chest and said yes, he would do it. Then one of his daughters would put
her hand on his arm and gentle him, the way he gentled his goats when
storms came. But somehow, coming from Razi, the words made the idea seem
so silly that they could both laugh at it. I had tried to figure out how
he did it, but it was proving a harder thing to learn than the bow.

The sun was down by the time we reached the hill overlooking the palace.
The moon hung low over the Sea of Glass, a mottled diamond whose light
turned the frozen waves into irregular bands of light and shadow.
Beneath us, the ancient palace of the Uncertain Angels glistened as if
it had been painted with teardrops. Music still rose faintly into the
night from its walls, a thousand years and more after its builders had
destroyed themselves.

"Look," Razi said, pointing. At first I didn't see it, but then motion
caught my eye. A sandy desert hare stood on his haunches, sniffing the
wind, while his tribe snuffled and nibbled among the roots of the
eucalyptus trees that grew next to the palace walls. I saw a splash in
the aqueduct behind them as a fish jumped for a night fly. The hares
froze, ready to scatter, then returned to their search for dinner, the
moment already forgotten.

"Do you want help?" I asked, gesturing at the bandage wrapped around
Razi's head. He nodded, and we started down the hill.

The aqueduct ran from the center of the palace all the way to the
village. It was rough-edged sandstone, human work, and seemed
half-finished compared to the smooth curved sparkle of the palace. Every
hundred strides or so, a square dipping pool bulged out of the
aqueduct's side. I filled our canteens at the nearest of these as Razi
unwrapped his bandage and handed it to me. Splashing some water on its
end, I dabbed at the gash the gargoyle had given him, jumping only
slightly when another little fish went 'ploop!' in beside us.

"That'll do," Razi eventually said. He fingered the gash's edges
gingerly. "How does it look?"

"Like someone tried to open up your head." I rolled up the
bandage---we'd boil it clean later---stretched, and yawned.

Razi grinned. "Past your bedtime."

I nodded. It had been a long day. We picked up our gear and trudged up
to Razi's tent in the lemon grove. Their blossoms gave the air a sharp,
clean edge.

A clay pot held closed with twine sat waiting in front of his tent.
Undoing the knot, Razi lifted the lid and sniffed. "Mm." Goat stew with
chilis and pomegranates---one of Grappa Uzman's many daughters or
granddaughters would have brought it as payment for the day's work. Razi
held it out to me.

I shook my head. "*Umma* will be waiting." My mother always waited up
when I was out with Razi. I knew because I had heard our neighbors
complain that her worrying kept them awake.

Razi set the pot down and faced me, raising his palms. "You did well
today."

"Not that well." The whole way home, I'd been thinking about missing my
first shot.

Razi laughed and clapped me on the shoulder. "Well enough. Now go on,
get some sleep. We'll talk tomorrow." He pushed me gently toward the
village.

I read once that the name "Aphsi" comes from an old Thindi phrase *aph e
sessi*, meaning, "the quiet people". If you were to walk through Medef
after dark, you would understand where the name came from. Most of the
conversation people surround themselves with doesn't really convey any
information. Its purpose is reassurance: yes, you are safe, your friends
are nearby.

Aphsi don't need that. They can *drome* that all is well. There was a
drum in the village square to sound the alarm in case of bandits or
fire, but most of the villagers would never think to use it. The only
sounds that night as I walked home were the goats, the birds, and Jephel
playing the flute.

He and Mureya were sitting on an old palm log people used as a bench. He
broke off when he caught sight of me and waved. I waved back, not
breaking stride, but then he asked, "How did it go?"

I sighed under my breath. "All right." He shuffled his weight sideways
to make room for me, but I ignored the invitation, and the uncomfortable
look on Mureya's face. She could *drome* that I didn't want to stop and
talk---not with Jephel, anyway.

But Jephel was *nif* like me, and he wanted to know the details. There
had been three? And we'd killed them all? Oh, but Razi was hurt? He
spoke just slowly enough that I couldn't help but interrupt every third
sentence. He didn't seem to mind---Jephel never seemed to mind anything,
not his chores, or the teasing of the other children, or the names they
had called him when his parents apprenticed him to the village butcher.
The only time I'd ever seen him angry was when Hediyeh and some of the
other girls teased Mureya for holding his hand. I don't know what they
*dromed*, but they never did it again.

I finally ran out of patience. "I'm sorry," I said, "But it's been a
long day, and *umma* will be wondering where I am."

"Of course, of course." He ducked his head. "I'm sure everyone will be
pleased that you took care of it." He laughed and patted his barrel of a
belly. "It's not like I could have."

"Yeah." I raised a hand and hurried away. Behind me, he started playing
again, a slow love song that the girls always asked for.

My mother was waiting for me at the door with a soft smile on her face.
"We got them," I said unnecessarily. She nodded and held up my festival
*deel* to show me that she had finished sewing new cuffs on the sleeves,
then set it aside to give me a quick hug.

I dropped my gear and sat on a pillow on the floor, reaching up to take
the bowl of rice and peppers she handed me. Ten minutes later I was
asleep on the slat bed in the curtained alcove that had been "mine"
since I turned ten. My mother had put fresh sprigs of mint and lemon
under my pillow; I think I dreamed of desert hares, and of moonlight on
the Sea of Glass, but after so many years, it is hard to remember.

---

People compare the desert to many different things. The pirates of Ini
Bantang and Barra Bantang say it is like the ocean: broad, trackless,
and completely indifferent to the fates of those who travel across it.
The tribesmen of Darp say it is just a hot, barren version of their own
great plains, while the Avauntois who look down on the Karaband from
their flying mountain simply shrug and say, "It's brown, and boring."
The silver-masked priests and princesses of Thind think it is like their
own country, full of lost cities, caravans cursed to wander forever,
monsters left over from the Angels' Disputation, and revenge.

All of these things are true, but none of them are right.

---

My mother shook me awake. "Razi wants you." Her voice was soft and
urgent. "Now."

It was an hour before dawn. I dipped my fingers in the washbowl and ran
them through my hair, slipped my deel over my head, and hurried out the
door, my sandals still in my hand. A moment later I doubled back to grab
my bow and the pack I had carried the day before.

A dayglass lantern cast dull orange light over two dozen or more people
in the village square. I didn't need to be able to *drome* to know they
were worried. I hurried over to Razi. He had taken the bandage off his
head; the gash was already scabbed over. Not for the first time, I
wondered about how quickly he healed. "What's happening?"

He pointed at a bald man in the center of the crowd, someone I had never
seen before. "Rode in a few minutes ago. Says he's from a caravan,
coming in early for the examination fair. Got hit by bandits last night,
lost half their livestock and most of their water."

"The lion?"

Razi nodded, a quick, angry jerk of his head. "Probably. They need help
rounding up what's left of their animals."

"Which would empty out the village."

"*La*, just so."

Grappa Uzman broke off talking to the stranger and beckoned us over.
Jephel was there, and Yassen the butcher, and Yassen's brother Kirash
who did whatever chores people would give him and drank too much---all
of us *nif*. "Here is Eben é Mogen á Dudir," Grappa Uzman said,
introducing the stranger to us in the formal way: Dudir, the son of Eben
the father and Mogen the mother.

"I am Razibendra uy-Ossisswe," Razi replied, raising his palms. Up
close, the stranger was much younger than I had thought---no more than
eighteen. His head was shaved, not bald, and his bare arms were as big
around as my thighs.

Dudir raised his palms in return, then reached forward to grasp Razi's
hand in the city way. "My father told me to look for you. He said you
could help."

"If I can." Razi turned to Grappa Uzman, raising his voice so everyone
could hear. "With your leave, grappa, I will take Kirash and half a
dozen to find their animals. Everyone else should stay here, and keep
watch."

"Half a dozen?" Dudir's dismay made his voice sound angry. "We lost two
hundred goats last night! We'll never find them all with just half a
dozen people!"

Razi grinned. "Half a dozen *Aphsi*," he corrected.

Two minutes later they were on their way out of the village, and Yassen,
Jephel, and I were on the roof of the bakery. Yassen had fetched his
bow; like me, he had been trained how to use it when he was young.
Jephel had been trained too, but had never amounted to more than a
danger to himself. There was nothing wrong with his eyes, though, or
with his patience. If the lion and her bandits came within a hundred
strides of any villager, they'd know. Our job was to spot them before
then.

Yassen nudged me with his elbow and passed me a stoppered jug of lemon
water. I took a sip and passed it to Jephel, my eyes on the hills south
and east of the village. The sun was just coming up, casting long autumn
shadows tinged green-blue at the edges. If anything moved, we would---

"There," Yassen said flatly, pointing. I looked north. Nothing,
nothing...I saw it, a dark outline that changed shape, then changed
shape again. I count three, four, and a fifth, larger, on four legs
instead of two. It was her.

"Pass me a rag," Yassen ordered. Silently, Jephel handed him a scrap of
cotton cloth. As Yassen wound it around the head of an arrow, Jephel
uncorked the brown bottle Yassen had "borrowed" from his brother. The
sharp smell that came from it was the evil twin of lemon's tang.

Yassen splashed some of the alcohol on the rag, then cursed. "Didn't
bring any matches."

I had some, wrapped in waxed paper along with my sewing needle and a
toothpick. A scratch and a touch later, the rag on the arrow was alight.

Yassen set it carefully on the string, drew back, and let it go. The
flame fluttered and died before the arrow arced down to strike an
innocent patch of candelilla.

"Do you think they saw it?" Jephel asked.

The morning shadows were already shorter than they had been, but knowing
where to look, I could still see the bandits slipping away. "She saw
it," I said. Lions only attack herds when they're desperate, or have the
element of surprise. We'd stay on the roof and watch, just in case, but
the excitement was over.

---

The caravan straggled into Medef a few hours later, raising an ochre
plume of dust that rolled over gently at the top like one of the frozen
waves on the Sea of Glass. From my post on the bakery roof, I counted
ten carts and thirty people: eleven on camels, six in the carts, and the
rest on foot. A short string of pack camels trailed along behind the
last cart, their brightly-dyed harnesses so dusty as to be almost
invisible. As I watched, the knots holding a round-cornered box on one
camel's back came loose. The box tumbled to the ground and broke open,
spilling dark cloth bags holding buttons or spices onto the trail. A
woman in a red-and-gray *deel* rushed over and began beating the camel's
side with her palms to get it to stop, cursing when it didn't even break
stride. The camel could smell water---it would have taken a strong arm
or another lion to stop it.

One cart stood out from the rest. It was drawn by a pair of burros,
instead of by one of the humpless camels the other carters used, and its
spoked wheels were as tall as me. The cart itself was a plain box;
whatever occupied it was securely wrapped in dark blue canvas held in
place with enough rope to rig a dozen tents. Its driver sat on the front
lip of the box with his back against his cargo and his burros' reins
loose in his hand. He wore darkly-patterned *deel* and a bright yellow
turban, which meant either that he was from Ossisswe, or that he was a
scholar, or that he liked the color yellow.

I nudged Yassen with my elbow to wake him. "Mmph?" He sat up and
scratched his beard with both hands. Jephel, who was sitting on the
other side of the roof, glanced at him, then at me, then went back to
watching the hills where we had seen the lion and her men.

"Sorry looking bunch, aren't they?" Yassen said sourly. He was right:
when Razi had said 'caravan', I had expected fifty carts or more, with
camels trailing behind them halfway to the horizon. Medef saw two of
those each year, one for the examination fair, the other three months
later, when merchants from the Salt Coast who were willing to risk the
terrors of the deep desert came through on their way to Ossisswe and
Coriandel. They brought dayglass, chocolate, silk, mace, ground coral,
fine leather, and books---above all else, books. Looking at the tired
faces below me, I wondered if anyone in this "caravan" could even read.

Yassen stood and stretched. The sun was a handspan past noon; the
afternoon heat made the bakery roof feel like the ovens beneath us.
"Keep your eyes wide," he ordered, lifting the palmed roof-hatch that
covered the ladder leading down into the cool dark below.

"Can we get some water?" Jephel asked. He held up his canteen and shook
it to show it was empty.

"I'll send some up." The closing hatch muffled his words.

Jephel sighed. "He'll forget, you know," he said philosophically, long
accustomed to people forgetting about him.

"Here." I tossed my canteen at him. Being thirsty would be better than
listening to him not complain.

As the caravan came down the last length of road leading into Medef, a
handful of villagers busied themselves in the posting yard. Palm tree
logs stood in a rough grid, twelve strides to a side. Ropes were quickly
strung on the pulleys hanging from their tops. Squares of canvas, each
big enough to cover the roof I was sitting on, were laid across the
ropes and hauled into place to form a single great awning over the
fairground. The southern and eastern sides were blocked by more sheets
of canvas to keep out the hot afternoon wind.

A hundred strides away, four men strained to raise the sluice gate at
the end of the aqueduct. Anywhere else in the Karaband, they would have
chanted, "*Heph...ho!*" to stay in time. But they were Aphsi, so they
worked in silence.

The sluice gate finally gave in with a screech of stone on stone. Water
poured from the covered aqueduct into the pipe that led to the
fairground. There, it splashed into a short trough, which in turn
spilled into a longer one. People would wash their hands and food in the
first; animals would drink from the second.

"Catch." Jephel tossed my canteen back to me. I shook it---he'd drunk
half---and tucked it under my *deel*. The sound of water gurgling into
the troughs below me had woken my thirst, but for some reason, I didn't
want Jephel to see that.

Two sharp whistles cut through the noise below me. I shielded my eyes
with my hand and watched as Razi and the villagers who had gone with him
came over the horizon in the midst of a hundred or more goats. There
wouldn't be any stragglers: if a goat was alive, an Aphsi would have
*dromed* it and brought it in.

Six houses away and two stories below, the caravan's lead cart reached
the stone gate that marked the edge of Medef. Its driver was the bald
man who had ridden in for help that morning. Beside him sat a younger
man who had to be his son: he had the same brawny arms, the same
eagle-beak nose, and the same bald head.

Grappa Uzman and Granna Efiyeh raised their palms to the pair in welcome
as the cart rolled past. A few strides further on, Hediyeh and some of
the other village girls stood in a silent cluster, their hands tucked
politely in their sleeves and their faces shadowed by the hoods of their
*deels*. I watched Hediyeh's head turn to follow the cart as it passed
her. The carter's son's head turned in time to look back. Something
prickled on my spine.

---

Thind has been an empire for a thousand years. At times, its masked
rulers have governed everything from the Wise River in the north to Ini
Bantang in the south, and from Cap di Per calle in the west to the East
Pole itself---everything, of course, except the dragon's isles. It has
twice been conquered by the Darpani, and twice more torn itself to
pieces with magic in a human echo of the Angels' Disputation.

Today, people say of the Thindi that they never do anything for the
first time. They have a ritual for everything: a new year's first cup of
tea, the beginning or end of marriage negotiations with a business
acquaintance, the death of a favorite pet. They have rules for how one
should dress, too, rules so precise that they leave almost nothing to
whim. If you see a man wearing a *dhoti* folded two finger widths below
his navel, a turban knotted in the rear, and rope sandals with
unbleached tie strings, you may know that he is the unlettered youngest
son of a peasant family that does not own its own hippo. Put a plain
shawl on his shoulders, and you may know that he can read; knot his
turban differently, and you proclaim that he is the oldest son, or a
middle child (whom the Thindi consider unlucky, since they cause so much
trouble).

In the Karaband, on the other hand, people are proud of the fact that no
two *deels* are exactly alike. We lengthen them, shorten them, add
pockets in common or unlikely places, reinforce the shoulders if we
frequently carry heavy loads... Over time, every *deel* learns from its
wearer how to do its job better, and every Karabandi learns how to read
a person's life from their *deel*.

The caravaneer in the yellow turban wore a *deel* like none I had ever
seen. The pattern on it was actually black and blue stains. A wide belt
was sewn around the waist to support the weight of whatever jingled and
clanked in the double pockets on each side. There were more small
pockets on the sleeves, though these seemed empty. A long tear in the
side had been carefully stitched shut. I knew Razi would ask me later
what his profession was, but I had no idea.

He had chosen a spot in the furthest corner of the tented market.
Whatever was in his cart was obviously heavy: he had tied it securely
right over the axle to stop its weight from tipping the cart forward or
backward. As he scratched his burros' ears and fed them handfuls of
barley he noticed me studying him. "*La*, young sir," he said, tying the
feed bag shut and tossing it onto the cart seat, "Will you help a
traveler?" He spoke in a pleasant tenor, rolling his R's and slanting
his Th's as people from Ossisswe do.

As I walked over, he raised his voice. "Dudir? A moment, if you would?"
The young man who had come for help waved to show that he had heard. He
was two stalls away, arguing with another man whose arms were just as
thick, and whose head was just as bald. His father, I decided, or his
uncle. Judging from the size of his belly and the rasp in his voice, he
liked his drink almost as much as Kirash.

The man in the yellow turban turned back to me. "Here is Suresh
ul-Ossisswe," he said, raising his palms.

I raised mine. "Here is Eimin ul-Medef," I replied. He raised an eyebrow
at that---at my age, I should have introduced myself as someone and
someone's---but made no comment. Instead, he reached into the cart and
began passing me cloth-wrapped packages an arm's length on a side to
stack on the shelves behind me.

I knew their wait instantly. They were books, dozens of them. My stomach
suddenly rumbled. "Would you like me to unwrap them?" I asked.

Suresh shook his head. "*La*, thank you, but no. I just want them out of
the way so we can get the press off the cart."

"The press?" I repeatedly stupidly.

He pointed at the irregular shape squatting in his cart. "My printing
press." The look on my face made him laugh good-naturedly.

"So you're another one, are you?" I hadn't heard Dudir come over. His
amusement didn't seem as friendly as Suresh's.

"Another what?" I asked.

He snorted. "Never mind. Let's get this weeping thing down on the
ground."

Getting it down meant chocking the wheels, undoing several dozen knots,
and looping the ropes around the press again. With Dudir's weight on one
harness post, and mine and Suresh's on the other, we tilted the cart
back, then paid out the ropes to let the press slide to the ground. The
whole process took about half an hour, by which time the sun was down,
and the smell of barbecued goat had turned my stomach into a hard knot
of hunger.

"Phah!" Dudir stretched until something in his back made a popping
sound. "Glad that's done." He undid the broad belt of his *deel* and
slipped it over his head to reveal a sleeveless shift and long, loose
pants.

I heard giggles behind me, but didn't turn around. Hediyeh and the other
girls were supposed to be helping make the welcome dinner, but they had
taken advantage of the confusion to slip away for an early look at what
the caravaneers had brought. With so many *nif* about, it would be a
while before their parents noticed they were gone.

Dudir grinned past me as he shook out his *deel* and put it back on. He
was as muscular as an ox. *And probably as smart,* I thought sourly.

Suresh clapped him on the shoulder. "Thank you again," he said. "And you
as well," he continued, turning to me. He gestured at the bundles of
books sleeping patiently in the stall beside his cart. "If you'd like to
borrow anything for the night..."

I heard another giggle behind me. I'm sure the girls could *drome* how
much I wanted to---how much I wanted to take them all back to my little
alcove and pore through them, sounding out the words I did not know and
wondering about the people who had written them. "*La*, thank you, but
it is late," I said. "Perhaps tomorrow."

---

- Discover that Eimin's father left years ago.
- The water stone used to supply the palace gardens
  - Now sustains the village
- Mention that other villages (Aphsi and *nif*) have failed
  - The desert is getting dryer

---

- Razi reveals the Other Hand to Eimin
- Aphsi-dominated secret society that protects the deep-desert villages
- Eimin is being trained to join it
- Central moral issue: is acceptance worth your soul?

---

- Eimin's sixteenth birthday
- He's apprenticing to be a carpenter
- This is where he changes path
- Suresh sows doubts about Razi
- Need to see what Aphsi society is like, so that Eimin's isolation is clear

---

- Eimin interrupts Suresh and Hediyeh
- Suresh is asking questions about the water stone
- Eimin finds his "still center"
- Hediyeh is shocked that he can creep up on her, then frightened by his feelings
- Suresh is just embarrassed

---

Suresh came to find me the next morning. I should have been practicing,
but instead I was sitting under my favorite lemon tree, sketching the
rest of the grove. I thought about leaving when he came over the
hill---I didn't feel like talking to anyone, especially him---then was
immediately angry at myself. I was done with going around other people.
Let them all stay out of my way for a change.

He trudged up the long rise to the foot of the lemon grove, stopped to
wipe his brow with his sleeve, and waved at me. I raised one hand
carelessly in reply. The sun had just cleared the big hill beside the
palace. It gave the lemon trees long shadows, as if someone had drawn
them, then smeared his hand across the page. My sketch didn't look
anything like that. I snapped the book shut and leaned back against my
tree.

I should say that it wasn't actually *my* tree, not like the nameday
trees you plant here. The grove belonged to the whole village. People
kept track of the number of days they worked in it, then took their
share of lemons and bark at harvest time.

The tree I was under stood apart from the rest. Someone, years ago, had
spat out a seed, and happened to hit good soil. It wasn't as tall or as
straight as the ones in the grove, and its lemons were so small,
thick-skinned, and sour that even Grappa Uzman wouldn't eat them. But it
had a better view than any of the others.

"Fair morning," Suresh said.

I opened my eyes. "Hi."

He cleared his throat uncomfortably. "Listen, about last night. I didn't
realize you and Hediyeh were..." His voice trailed off.

I snorted. "We're not." And then, because I'd grown up among people who
could *drome*, and there's no point not asking a question when everyone
around you knows you want to ask it, I said, "Did you...?"

He hesitated, then nodded. "I kissed her, if that's what you're asking."

It was. I shrugged. "*La*, good for you." I picked up a pebble and
tossed it down the hillside.

Suresh sat down a few feet away from me. "So what is it? Why are you so
mad?"

I scowled. "You're not my listener."

He raised his hands, palms facing me, meaning, "I've heard what you
said," then lowered them again.

We sat there in silence for a few moments, looking down at the lemon
trees. "It's just..." I shook my head. I could feel tears waiting to
happen---tears, at sixteen. I opened my eyes wide to dry them and tried
to finish my sentence. "It's just that you're not Aphsi, so being *nif*
doesn't matter. But for me..." I spread my hands.

"Ah." He nodded his understanding. "So when Hediyeh---"

"It's not about Hediyeh!" I interrupted angrily. "It's---it's just
everything."

We sat in silence for a minute or more. There was a breeze, a light
breath of wind off the glass. The leaves rustled over my head.

Suresh cleared his throat. "Is that yours?" he asked, nodding his head
at the sword leaning against the lemon tree.

"Yeah. I'm supposed to be practicing."

He stood up and brushed his hands on his shirt. "May I?"

I shrugged. "If you want."

He took the scabbard in one hand, hefting it for weight, then drew the
blade. It wasn't much---two fingers wide at the base, narrowing slowly
to a point, sharp on both edges. The grip was wrapped with plain goat
leather, with seed-sized grains of sand underneath to give it texture.
The hilt was a simple crosspiece, slightly shorter on one side than the
other.

Suresh swung it back and forth, testing the balance, then dropped his
left foot back and folded his left arm behind his back. "Not bad," he
said. He lunged at the air, stepped, lunged again, cut high, parried his
invisible opponent, then straightened up. "How long have you had it?"

I got to my feet so that I wouldn't have to look up his nose while I was
talking to him. "About a year. I haven't really used it much---I'm a lot
better with the bow."

"Mm." He glanced at me. "But a bow's just a hunter's weapon, isn't it?
And they want to see if you can be more than just a hunter."

I leaned against the lemon tree. "What do you mean?"

He sheathed the sword and handed the scabbard back to me. "I know about
the Other Hand, Eimin." His eyes searched my face. "I know who they are,
and what they're doing to you."

I looked down at the scabbard in my hands to hide my confusion. "I don't
know what you mean," I said. On impulse, I drew the sword and fell into
the stance Razi had taught me, turned sideways like Suresh had been, but
with my left hand up and out for balance, or to grab at my opponent.

He pointed. "I mean like that. That's not for dueling. And no soldier
would ever stand like that, not with another man at each shoulder.
That's a brawler's stance. That's for bandits and nightwork, that is.
Eimin, do you know who Razi really is?"

I cut left, cut right, stabbed, stepped back, cut right, stabbed,
stepped back, cut left. Never the same pattern twice in a row, Razi had
told me, over and over again. Watch for your opponents' patterns, but
never give them any.

"Eimin!" Suresh stepped in front of me and knocked my blade sideways
with a sweep of his forearm. "Do you know who Razi really is?"

"I don't want to talk to you about this," I said. I felt---I don't know
the words for what I felt. Angry? Panicked? Like I was standing on the
edge of a cliff, looking down, with the wind tugging at me?

"Eimin, he works for Lady Kembe, in Ossiswe. The magician. He's her
hands in the world. Do you know that phrase? He does the things she
can't do herself. He spies on people for her, and steals from them,
and---"

"What's any of that got to do with you?" I turned away from him and
started another exercise, a fast one, but I kept listening.

"Eimin, stop. Stop! Listen to me. It isn't my business, not that part,
but it is yours. Or it ought to be. How do you think she pays him back?"

"Magic." I feinted and lunged, over and over again, trying to make it
one smooth motion, growing angrier by the second. "In case you hadn't
noticed, there aren't any Aphsi magicians."

"Yes, but do you know what kind of magic? Eimin, she makes *nif*."

It took a moment for his words to sink in. I turned on him, the sword
still in my hand. "What?"

He raised his hands, palms facing me. "She makes people *nif*, Eimin.
People like you. That's the deal. That's always been the deal. The Other
Hand does her work in the world, and she---"

Rage boiled up inside me. "Shut up!" I took a step toward him, raising
the sword.

He didn't flinch. He didn't even look at the sword. He just shook his
head. "No, Eimin, I won't shut up. I won't. Think about it. The Aphsi
need to have *nif*. They need people who can butcher and hunt and, and
kill, like Razi sometimes kills. Maybe there are a few natural *nif*,
but most of you are made that way, before you're born. That's what the
Aphsi get from magicians."

"You're lying," I said coldly. I sheathed the sword and stooped to pick
up my sketchbook. "I don't want to hear any more."

"Eimin---Eimin, I used to work for a magician, in Ossisswe." His voice
was almost pleading. I straightened up, clutching the sketchbook tight
against my chest, but didn't look at him. "I was mending some old books
for him, and he asked me if I would take everything from his storeroom
and put it on the shelves. I dropped one of the boxes, and while I was
picking up the papers that had fallen out, I saw some notes he'd written
down about a spell to make people *drome*."

"Hah!" I glared at him. "Now I know you're lying. Magic can't make
people *drome*."

He nodded. "I know, I know. He hadn't been able to make the spell work.
The point is, what he'd started with was an opposite spell, to make
people *nif*. His notes said he'd learned it from Lady Kembe, who used
it regularly. That's what the page said, Eimin. 'Regularly'."

"So you came running out here to tell us, right?"

He hesitated, then shook he head. "No. That was three years ago. I just
put the pages back in the box, and put the box on the shelf. I didn't
think it was any of my business. I don't even think I'd met any Aphsi
back then. But..." He shook his head. "I just couldn't let go of it. Or
it couldn't let go of me. I started asking questions, and reading. About
a year ago I met a caravaneer who told me about the Other Hand, about
what happened to bandits who tried to raid the Aphsi. And then I went to
Razi's trial, and---"

"What? What trial?"

He searched my face again. "You don't know that either? Someone stole a
glass turtle from Lord Mezeri. He's another magician in Ossisswe, Lady
Kembe's main rival. The city guard took Razi for it, but couldn't prove
it was him. That's why he's been here so much for the last
year---Ossisswe just wouldn't be healthy right now."

"I don't believe you." I pushed past him. "I don't believe any of this."

"Eimin. Eimin!" he called to my back. "It doesn't matter whether you
believe it or not, it's true. You're not an accident, Eimin. None of
this is an accident. They made you *nif*, and now they're making you
into a sword." He fell silent. I didn't look back.

---

I hiked out to Tin Point the next day. I kept my pack light: three
canteens, my tent, some dry date bread, my knife, and my climbing rope.
I don't know why I took the climbing rope. Or the knife, for that
matter. I took my sketchbook as well, and my box of charcoals.

I skirted the goat pasture so that I wouldn't have to explain where I
was going to Grappa Uzman. It's funny---when I was little, I loved to
pet and feed his goats, and listen to his stories about chasing away
gargoyles, or the time he went half-way to Ossisswe to sell one that had
blue eyes. Now that I'm older, I'd love to hear those stories again. At
sixteen, though, I thought the stories were as boring as the grownups
who told them. Besides, he would probably ask me where I was going, and
since he wasn't *nif*, I wouldn't be able to lie.

The path ran through the lemon grove, along the hill overlooking the
palace, then down past the watchtower where I'd killed the gargoyle to
the old shoreline. The Sea of Glass was dazzling. I put on my sun
goggles as I walked. The secret to traveling long distances, I'd
discovered, was to create a rhythm in my head. My feet were its
backbone: left, right, left, right. I imagined a little wordless tune on
top of it, da-dum-di-dum-di-diddle, da-dum-di-dum-di-day. If I had my
hands hooked through the shoulder straps of my pack, I tapped another
little pattern with my fingers: first-fourth-second-third-thumb, then
fourth-second-third-first-thumb. I could go a hundred paces or more with
a single pattern. When I grew tired of that, I tried to see how many
different words I could spell using just the letters from a word like
"eucalyptus" or "catastrophe".

And I had conversations, lots of them. Sometimes they were "should have
saids"---things I didn't think of saying at the right time that would
have been funny, or cutting, or made me seem wise. A lot of times I
imagined myself rescuing someone from lions, or climbing down a sheer
cliff to save a child who'd slipped and fallen. I fought duels with
bandits in the middle of gritstorms, beat off whole flocks of gargoyles,
and snuck in and out of magicians' palaces without leaving so much as my
breath behind.

Oh, you're laughing, but we've all had daydreams like that. I would
never have told anybody about them when I was sixteen, any more than I
would have stopped to talk to Grappa Uzman. They were just a way to pass
the time while I was walking, and more fun than my real life.

I stopped for a drink and a mouthful of date bread when I reached the
shore. On a whim, I dropped my pack and walked out fifty paces onto the
glass. The three fish Razi had once showed me were still there, frozen
in the glass a double arm's length below me. The one in front was bent
slightly, as if it had been about to turn left when things changed. I'd
never noticed before, but a shallow depression had been worn into the
glass above the fish. People had been coming and looking at them for a
thousand years. They were long gone, but the fish were still there. I
felt a little foolish after a moment, so I walked back to the beach and
kept going.

I stayed on the trail after that. It would actually have been easier to
walk on the glass---it was flatter, and there weren't any potholes---but
I was going to spend the next two days doing that. I pulled a stubby
leaf off a raspberry cactus as I walked and chewed it to a pulp to kill
my thirst.

There is life all around in the desert, if you know where to look. There
was a spider web on that cactus, for example. The spider might have been
hiding from the sun down among the cactus's roots, but she was there. I
saw finger lizards sunning themselves on rocks, and an S-curve across
the road that some snake had left the night before. A shirrup followed
me for half an hour or more, flitting from rock to bush to cactus,
sometimes ahead of me, sometimes behind, hoping for a crumb of date
bread, or maybe just waiting to see if I would scare something tastier
than finger lizards into breaking cover.

I slept beneath an overhanging rock during the middle of the day. I
allowed myself two mouthfuls of water before I closed my eyes---you
sweat less when you're not moving, so my body would have a chance to
soak it all up. I kept my knife in my hand as I dozed, as Razi had
taught me. I'd been worried the first few times that I would cut myself
in my sleep, but I never had. I still didn't do it when I was at home in
my own hammock, though.

I reached the cache at the end of Tin Point about an hour before
sundown. It was marked by a pile of rocks that came up to my waist.
There were water bottles underneath them, and sealed jars of honeyed
fruit, medicines, bandages, even some firewood. I didn't take
anything---it was only for emergencies. But it was a good place to camp,
so I did.

I washed down a thick slice of date bread with what was left in my first
canteen and pulled my sketchbook out of my bag. The sun had just touched
the horizon, and the whole Sea of Glass had turned red and orange, as if
it were on fire. I drew the lines of the frozen waves as quickly as I
could, smudging them with my thumb to make shadows. The sea had been
calm here, when the great spell came. I thought it must have been a
beautiful day.

I stopped sketching when the creeping shadows reached me. I yawned and
rolled my shoulders to get out the kinks, tucked my sketchbook back in
my pack, and wrapped myself in my traveling robe for warmth. Finally, as
the small creatures of the evening began to stir, I couldn't avoid
thinking about what Suresh had said any longer.

There were a hundred reasons why it couldn't be true. Something like
that could never be kept secret. And besides, the Aphsi didn't have
magicians. No-one knew why, but people who could *drome* never had a
talent for magic.

But maybe it wasn't a secret. Maybe grownups just didn't talk about it
around children. Maybe they were waiting until they could *drome* that I
was ready to accept it. Maybe that was another of the Other Hand's
tests.

I realized suddenly that I was playing finger-patterns on the ground,
one-four-three-two-thumb, thumb-four-one-three-two. I took a deep breath
and relaxed. What if---just supposing it was true. Just supposing. Did
my mother know? Had someone come to her and my father and said, "It has
been decided"? Or was there some sort of lottery? Or had they
volunteered? I thought about my mother, heavy and round like Hediyeh's
mother had been when she was carrying the twins. A dark figure bowed its
head and put its hand on her belly. The air tingled with power, and---

I shook my head. It couldn't be true. Being *nif* was just bad luck,
that was all. And anyway, if I'd been made *nif*, then Jephel must have
been made that way too. I snorted. FIXME: something disparaging.

The stars had come out. I closed my eyes and dreamed of Jephel wearing a
magician's embroidered robe, turning himself into a goat by mistake.

I woke up as the sky started to pale. It only took me a moment to make
water and shoulder my pack. Dawn is the best time to walk on glass. The
glare is bad, but you miss the worst of the heat. I put on my goggles
and set off.

Once I was on it, the sea didn't seem as calm as it had the evening
before. The frozen waves were a couple of feet high, which meant that
the surface was never exactly flat. My ankles always felt like they
wanted to roll over. Every few paces, I had to step up onto the crest of
the next wave. My thighs started to burn after a few hundred steps, but
the feeling passed and I found my rhythm, step step step and up, over
and over again.

I waited until the sun was halfway to noon before putting up my
umbrella. I was quite proud of it---it was made out of Bantangui bamboo,
and I was always careful to roll the cloth, rather than letting it fold,
so it wasn't cracked or creased. Best of all, the handle slipped into a
sock I'd sewn onto the side of my pack, so that I had my hands free
while I walked.

Nothing lives on the glass. Parents tell their children stories about
glass turtles, and glass crabs, and even glass squid, but they're just
stories. Even the birds don't go very far from shore. Underneath is a
different story: there are places where springs well up, and just enough
light gets through the glass for life to bloom. Grappa Uzman told me
once that there were places where the glass had cracked, and trees had
sprouted, but he never said where that was, and from the smiles on other
children's faces, I guessed they could *drome* he was just telling a
story.

I hiked until early in the afternoon, then pitched my tent with the
silver side out to reflect away the sun. Lying inside was like being in
an oven, but walking would have been worse. I drank some water and tried
to take shallow breaths. I had been turning Suresh's words over and over
in my head while I walked. What if? What if it was true? What if that
was why my father had left?

I closed my eyes and did something I hadn't done since I was little. I
tried to *drome*. For a while, I believed that if only I wanted it
enough, if I really tried, somehow I'd be able to. Then I laughed at
myself. The nearest living things were half a day's walk behind me. Even
if I could suddenly *drome*, how would I tell?

I crawled out of my tent late in the afternoon and set off again. If I
walked until midnight, slept for three or four hours, then pushed myself
hard, I'd be at the fishing fleet by mid-day. I wished that I had saved
some of the raspberry cactus---I was going to have enough water, but I
was thirsty whenever I let myself think about it. So I tried to think
about other things, which meant about Suresh kissing Hediyeh, and Jephel
dancing with Mureya, and how long it would be before someone found me if
I slipped and broke my ankle on the glass.

The sun went down. The stars came out. My thoughts chased themselves
around and around in my head. It could be true, I decided. That didn't
mean it was, but it could be. Only a few Aphsi would have to know. My
mother probably didn't. Even Razi might not. The Other Hand, or somebody
else, could just decide, and have their magician make the spell, without
telling anyone else. Then they could wait to see who worked out, and who
didn't. Somebody like Jephel would just grow up to be a butcher. Someone
like me would be taught how to hunt and climb, how to move silently, how
to become so still inside that even the most sensitive Aphsi in the
world couldn't---

That was it. All of the exercises Razi had given me, teaching me to
quiet my thoughts and let go of my feelings. They weren't really to
teach me how to hide my *deroma* from Aphsi. What would be the point of
that? They were trying to see if I could control my anger enough to be
told that being *nif* wasn't just bad luck. Suresh was right.

I stopped in my tracks. I had never felt anything like the cold, clear
rage that filled me at that moment. I wanted to hurt somebody. I wanted
to drag them out into the village square and tell the whole world what
they'd done. I wanted to blind them, put out their ears, make them *nif*
like me, then leave them lying there, weeping. I didn't know who they
were, but I was going to find out.

I almost turned around to head straight back to Medef, but instead I
stayed on my original course. "A fatal mistake can sometimes save you a
few minutes of thought," Razi told me once. If I went back to Medef
then, everyone in the village would be able to *drome* how angry I was.
I needed a plan, and I needed to be as clear inside as the glass beneath
my feet.

I didn't stop for sleep that night. I ate and drank as I walked, and
reached the fishing fleet at dawn.

There was nothing left of them above the glassline, not after a thousand
years, but their hulls still lay perfectly preserved in the glass. Some
of the fishermen had been thrown from deck onto the glass when the spell
came and froze the sea beneath them. One had been up to his ankles in
water-I found the two holes that showed where his friends had chipped
him out of the glass. The holes' edges had been worn smooth by time, but
I could still see where each toe had been.

I looked around for a while to see if I could find any fish bones for
good luck, but they were long gone. It felt eerie being there on my own,
surrounded by silence, looking at the moment when everything changed. I
knelt and ran my hand over a frozen bow wave, then brushed my fingers
along the worn top of the ship's hull. There was grit there, carried by
the wind. One day it would wear the waves themselves away. I slipped my
pack from my shoulders and pitched my tent.

I slept through the heat somehow. When I woke, I tore a page out of my
sketchbook, wrote, "Eimin the Nif was here" on it, and left it on the
glass underneath an empty canteen. My shadow walked tall beside me until
the sun went down.

---

- Suresh tries to get Eimin into his plans
- Aphsi know something is wrong: Hediyeh guesses that Eimin is going to run away
- Confrontation with Razi
- Eimin's mother convinces him that it's not true
- His "father" left because of her affair with Razi

---

I ran. I ran like a jackrabbit runs, like a hawk flies. I ran like I had
never run before. Cold sick fear lay heavy in my gut. The moon was
already half-way up the sky. I'm not going to make it, I thought, then
ran even faster.

I stumbled just before the top of the hill, scraping my hands and knees
as I fell. I knelt there panting for a moment, then struggled back to my
feet and kept going. The only sounds were my breathing and the steady
crunch of my sandals, left, right, left, right. Razi's sword bumped
against my hip every second step. I had to find Suresh, and stop him.

I reached the top of the hill. The palace shone in the moonlight. I
could smell lemon trees and moist earth. There! Someone was standing in
the shadows by the palace gate. No, wait, there were two people, and
they were kissing.

It was Suresh and Hediyeh. She pushed him away, then grabbed his wrists
and pulled him back. They kissed again. Good, I thought coldly. As long
as they're doing that, I don't have to worry about being seen. I cleared
my throat, spat, and started running again.

The path dipped behind a shoulder of the hill. When I could see the
palace again, the gate was open, and they were gone. Then I was running
through rows of eucalyptus, neat and square.

The trees stopped two dozen strides from the gate. I slowed to a walk,
drawing Razi's sword. The quicksilver blade took shape with a soft
gurgle, like water being poured from a jug. Heart pounding, I stepped
through the gate.

The palace music played softly around me. I let out my breath with a
whoosh. It would have stopped if the spell had already been broken.
There was still time. I closed my eyes. My heart was pounding in my
chest. I imagined calming it, soothing it, as if it were a frightened
pocket mouse. Suresh couldn't *drome*---at least, I hoped he
couldn't---but Hediyeh certainly could. Sh, be still, be still, I
thought. I imagined myself petting my heart gently, rubbing its ears,
brushing its soft fur. I imagined it growing still under my hand, until
it did.

I opened my eyes. My moonshadow was just two fingers wide. There wasn't
much time left. I trotted across the outer courtyard on the balls of my
feet and took the stairs two at a time. I was calm. I was certain. I was
as clear as your breath, empty, a quiet stream flowing without a ripple
or a wave.

I pressed myself against the wall next to the open door, then craned my
head to look into the greeting room. Empty. I slipped inside. They had
probably gone through the inner courtyard to the pool. I ran the other
way, to the audience room. A side door opened onto a narrow stairway
that led up to a window set just below the roof. When the palace was in
use, a servant would have stood there to watch for guests arriving. It
didn't overlook the pool, but it was big enough for me to squeeze
through.

I pushed Razi's sword back into its bottle, corking it with the handle.
The window was waist-high. I put both hands on the sill and hopped up
onto it, tucking my feet underneath me. It wasn't quite tall enough for
me to stand, so I leaned out, one hand on the wall for balance, the
other reaching up for the edge of the roof. The stone felt cool against
my skin. I took a breath, let go of the wall, and stepped out.

My whole weight hung from one hand for a heartbeat until my other hand
found purchase. I pulled myself up onto the roof and drew Razi's sword
once again. The stones were dark and discolored where the brief puddles
left behind by occasional storms had dried. I hunched down and crept
forward.

Suresh and Hediyeh were already in the pool, laughing and splashing.
Their clothes lay at the pool's edge. Suresh's body and legs were pale
in the moonlight, though his hands and feet and face were bark brown.
Hediyeh---Hediyeh was all one color. That's all I want to say.

Suresh lunged forward, catching Hediyeh's foot. "Stop it! Stop it!" she
squealed as he tickled her. He let go, then dove, swam beneath her,
popped up behind her, and flicked water off his fingers into her eyes as
she turned around.

"Stop!" she giggled. She wiped her face. "You swim so well. You're like
a fish."

"Thank you. I practically grew up in the water back home." He slipped
around her, heading for his clothes. "Used to spend pretty much every
summer in the lake, looking for treasure."

"Treasure? Really?" Hediyeh dog-paddled after him. I shifted my weight.
What was he doing?

"Well, no, I mean, there wasn't really any treasure." He glanced up at
the moon, then back at Hediyeh. He was at the edge of the pool now. "But
I was, I don't know, seven, maybe eight, and there was this story about
a boy who found a gold necklace and a helmet once. It was a true story,
too." He kicked himself up a few inches so that he could reach out and
pull his clothes closer.

"You're not getting out already, are you?" Hediyeh pouted.

"What? No, no, I'm just... Anyway, the boy sold them in Ossisswe, then
bought a whole herd of goats and lived happily ever after." Suresh
pulled something out of the pocket of his trousers and turned back to
Hediyeh.

"So did you ever find anything?" she asked.

"Mm hm." He held up the ring. It sparkled in the moonlight.

"Oh! Let me see!" He held it out, then pulled it away just before she
took it.

"Come and get it," he grinned. He wriggled away from her, drawing her
toward him, always out of reach. He was leading her closer to the
waterstone, directly beneath me. I tensed.

"Oh, stop teasing!" Hediyeh paddled forward. I slipped my feet out of my
sandals. Suresh was almost close enough. Almost...

Suddenly he stopped backing away. He looked up at the sky. "It's time,"
he said, and he slipped the ring onto his finger.

Hediyeh screamed in shock as the ancient haunt flooded into Suresh. He
lunged forward and grabbed her arm. "Let go! Let go!" she shrieked. She
tried to pull away, but he was too strong. He pulled her close, spinning
her around so that he could get his other arm around her neck. The ring
throbbed with red light, making the water look like blood had already
been spilled in it.

I splashed into the pool an arm's length away. My feet hit the bottom
hard. I pushed off, so that I shot halfway back out of the water again.
Hediyeh screamed again. I raised my arm. The quicksilver blade of the
sword licked the night above us. "Let go of her!" I ordered.

"Eimin!" Suresh tightened his grip on Hediyeh's neck, choking off her
scream. "What are you---"

"Let go!" I twisted in the water and feinted at him. The sword blade
snapped like a whip just inches from his head.

"Eimin, no, wait, listen to me. Listen! You have to let me do this.
Eimin, it's for both of us." He glanced up at the moon again. "Please,
Eimin, think! Think about what they did to you. Think about what they
kept from you! Once I have the power that's in that stone, I can undo
that. I can make you like everyone else. We can stop them from ever
doing it to anyone ever again. Please, Eimin, I know what you're
thinking, but it's the only way."

"You don't know what I'm thinking," I said. I flicked the sword at him
again to try to back him away from the stone. He didn't flinch this
time. The blade caught his shoulder, leaving a thin red line that
immediately started to drip. His ring brightened.

"So is that it? Are you going to be a pawn all your life, when you could
be a king?" Hediyeh pulled at his arm. Her mouth was open, her eyes
bulged. She couldn't breathe. He was choking her while he talked to me.

"I don't know what I'm going to be," I told him. I flicked the sword
again. "All I know is that you're a liar. Nobody did this to me. Nobody
made me this way. My mother wouldn't let them."

His face hardened. He took a deep breath. He was going to dive. Hediyeh
had almost stopped struggling. He was going to dive and give her death
to the stone. I was out of time.

I lunged forward. Razi's sword went right through the joint of Hediyeh's
shoulder and into Suresh's ribs. She tried to scream, but couldn't. He
could. He did. His scream was rage and pain and a thousand years of
being trapped in a little shard of glass.

He shouted a word and slapped the sword blade with the hand that wore
the ring. The blade snapped like a dry twig. He rolled in the water and
dove. I dropped the broken sword and went after him.

His ring was so bright now that it cast red-tinged shadows. Hediyeh was
limp in his arms. Dark blood made the water murky. He grabbed the corner
of the waterstone with one hand to steady himself and held her down
against it with the other. Air bubbled out of his mouth as he began the
spell.

I frog-kicked over to him and grabbed his arm. He tried to beat me away,
but the water took the force of the blow away. I was already running out
of air. The ring was blinding me. I let go of him, grabbed Hediyeh's
arm, and planted my feet on the waterstone to try to pull her away.

Cold... I have never felt cold like that. It was as if ice water was
flooding into my veins. The waterstone wanted. The cold rose through my
legs, into my body. I pulled weakly at Hediyeh's arm. It was too late.
The cold was in my heart, sucking all my strength away. I couldn't---

I twisted, and with the last of my strength I let go of Hediyeh and
jammed my fingers into Suresh's mouth to stop the spell. He bit them in
surprise, then tried to pull his head away. He couldn't let go of the
waterstone. He couldn't let go of Hediyeh. He couldn't get away from me,
so he tried to spit them out, but I hung on. I was actually holding on
to his bottom teeth for an instant.

The red glow started to fade. He shook his head from side to side
frantically. I was so cold. I couldn't feel my legs any more. The glow
flickered and died. In the last of its light I caught a glimpse of
Suresh's face. Whatever was in there looked back at me full of hate and
despair and longing, and then it was gone.

The next thing I remember I was lying on my back looking up at the
stars. I didn't know where I was. I knew I was cold, but I didn't have
the energy to fetch a blanket. My mother would look in on me in a while.
She could always *drome* when I was awake, when I was too hot or too
cold. She'd take care of me.

I blinked and turned my head as Suresh dragged Hediyeh out of the pool.
I must have made a sound, because he looked at me. Our eyes met. He
shook his head slowly and started to sob. I closed my eyes again.

---

When I woke again, Razi was beside me. He had cut his shirt into strips,
and was bandaging Hediyeh's shoulder. Suresh was gone.

"Cold..." I whispered. He nodded without looking at me, intent on his
work.

"I'll build a fire as soon as I can. She's lost a lot of blood." He
knotted another strip of shirt under her armpit, then sat back and
rubbed his ankle. "What happened?"

"Suresh...?"

Razi shook his head. "Gone. But he left this." He held up a small glass
ring. It was just glass, now. Whatever had been in it had missed its
chance.

I tried to sit up, but I was too weak. It was like one of those bad
dreams where you're a puppet whose strings have been cut, so that you
can see and hear, but you can't move. "Can't ..." I gasped. For some
reason it seemed funny to me. I started to chuckle, but it turned into a
wheeze.

Razi frowned. "Well, then who fished you out of the---oh. Hm.
Interesting." He turned the ring over in his hand thoughtfully, then
tucked it into his pocket and struggled to his feet. "And where's my
damn sword? If there's even a scratch on it..."

In the end, I went for help, so that Razi could stay and look after
Hediyeh. It wasn't a good idea. I only had to walk as far as the goat
pasture, but it seemed to take as long as my trek out to the fleet. I
stumbled lightheadedly straight into the arms of Grappa Uzman. I don't
know how much sense he made of the story I told him, but it frightened
him enough for him to send one of his grandsons back to Medef for help.
I fell asleep, shivering, as the sun came up.

It was a month before my strength returned. I spent most of that time
sleeping, or sitting on the roof, watching the world go by. A pair of
sand pigeons built a nest in the eucalyptus tree beside our house in
that month. Little Ashwara took her first steps. And somehow, Hediyeh
became a hero.

I'm still not quite sure how that happened. The waterstone had taken
even more out of her than me, and for a few days the wound in her
shoulder---the wound I'd given her---looked like it was going to go bad.
Once she was well enough to sit up and talk, though, her room was never
empty. Everyone wanted to hear the story from her, over and over,
grownups and children alike. Or maybe they could just *drome* how much
she enjoyed telling it.

Razi came to see me every day. One morning he brought three people with
him, two men and a woman. The two men asked me questions, over and over,
patiently, drawing every little detail of the story out of me. The woman
just listened and frowned.

Razi came back into my room after they left and turned his left hand
over, palm up, palm down, meaning, "The Other Hand". I nodded. I had
guessed as much. They didn't look like Razi, any more than any other
Aphsi, but there was something in their eyes, sadness and patience and
acceptance and watchfulness all at once.

"They still haven't found your friend," he said. "Someone took water and
food from the cache at Tin Point, but there's no trail. We asked Lady
Kembe to try a spell, but even she couldn't find him."

"Do you think he's dead?" I asked.

Razi shook his head. "Dead men can't hide that well. Oh, but here, I
almost forgot. This is for you." He brought his arm out from behind his
back and handed me a chessboard in a leather sleeve, and a cloth bag
full of pieces.

"Thanks. Thanks, Razi." I slipped the board out of its sleeve. "Do you
have time for a game?"

He grinned. "Always." He pulled the little lopsided table I'd made over
beside my hammock, then sat on the stool on the other side. Razi took
the bag from me and poured the pieces onto the board. A moment later he
held up two fists. "Choose."

I laughed. "Either." He laughed too, then opened his hands to show me a
pair of white pawns.
