---
layout: post
title: "Meetings"
date: 2018-05-11 01:55
---

*[This thread on Twitter](https://twitter.com/gvwilson/status/994553693772099589)
sparked a lot of interest, so I hope it's useful if I publish the whole section on meetings
from the upcoming revision of [How to Teach Programming (and Other Things)]({{site.github.url}}/2018/04/28/v3-feedback.html).*

---

Most people are really bad at meetings: they don't have an agenda
going in, they don't take minutes, they waffle on or wander off into
irrelevancies, they repeat what others have said or recite banalities
simply so that they'll have said something, and they hold side
conversations (which pretty much guarantees that the meeting will be a
waste of time).  Knowing how to run a meeting efficiently is a core
skill for anyone who wants to get things done. (Knowing how to take
part in someone else's meeting is just as important, but gets far less
attention—as a colleague once said, everyone offers leadership
training, nobody offers followership training.) The most important
rules for making meetings efficient are not secret, but are rarely
followed:

- **Decide if there actually needs to be a meeting.** If the only
  purpose is to share information, have everyone send a brief email
  instead. Remember, you can read faster than anyone can speak: if
  someone has facts for the rest of the team to absorb, the most
  polite way to communicate them is to type them in.

- **Write an agenda.** If nobody cares enough about the meeting to
  write a point-form list of what's supposed to be discussed, the
  meeting itself probably doesn't need to happen.

- **Include timings in the agenda.** Agendas also help you keep the
  meeting moving (as in, "That's very interesting, but we have five
  other topics to get through in the next fifteen minutes, so could
  you please make your point?"), so include the time to be spent on
  each item in the agenda.  Your first estimates with any new group
  will be wildly optimistic, so revise them upward for subsequent
  meetings.

- **Prioritize.** Every meeting is a micro-project, so work should be
  prioritized in the same way that it is for other projects: things
  that will have high impact but take little time should be done
  first, and things that will take lots of time but have little impact
  should be skipped.

- **Put someone in charge.** "In charge" means keeping the meeting
  moving, glaring at people who are muttering to one another or
  checking email, and telling people who are talking too much to get
  to the point.  It does *not* mean doing all the talking; in fact,
  whoever is in charge will usually talk less than anyone else, just
  as a referee usually kicks the ball less often than the players.

- **Require politeness.** No one gets to be rude, no one gets to
  ramble, and if someone goes off topic, it's the chair's job to say,
  "Let's discuss that elsewhere."

- **No technology.** Insist that everyone put their phones, tablets,
  and laptops into politeness mode (i.e., closes them).  If this is
  too stressful, let participants hang on to their electronic
  pacifiers but turn off the network so that they really *are* using
  them just to take notes or check the agenda.

- **No interruptions.** Participants should raise a finger, put up a
  sticky note, or make one of the other gestures people make at
  high-priced auctions instead if they want to speak next.  If the
  speaker doesn't notice you, the person in charge ought to.

- **Record minutes.** Someone other than the chair should take
  point-form notes about the most important pieces of information that
  were shared, and about every decision that was made or every task
  that was assigned to someone.

- **Take notes.** While other people are talking, participants should
  take notes of questions they want to ask or points they want to
  make.  (You'll be surprised how smart it makes you look when it's
  your turn to speak.)

- **End early.** If your meeting is scheduled for 10:00-11:00, you
  should aim to end at 10:55 to give people time to get where they
  need to go next.

As soon as the meeting is over, the minutes should be circulated
(e.g., emailed to everyone or posted to a wiki):

- **People who weren't at the meeting can keep track of what's going
  on.** You and your fellow students all have to juggle assignments
  from several other courses while doing this project, which means
  that sometimes you won't be able to make it to team meetings.  A
  wiki page, email message, or blog entry is a much more efficient way
  to catch up after a missed meeting or two than asking a team mate,
  "Hey, what did I miss?"

- **Everyone can check what was actually said or promised.** More than
  once, I've looked over the minutes of a meeting I was in and
  thought, "Did I say that?" or, "Wait a minute, I didn't promise to
  have it ready then!"  Accidentally or not, people will often
  remember things differently; writing it down gives team members a
  chance to correct mistaken or malicious interpretations, which can
  save a lot of anguish later on.

- **People can be held accountable at subsequent meetings.** There's
  no point making lists of questions and action items if you don't
  follow up on them later.  If you're using a ticketing system, the
  best thing to do is to create a ticket for each new question or task
  right after the meeting, and update those that are being carried
  forward.  That way, your agenda for the next meeting can start by
  rattling through a list of tickets.

This isn't the only way to run a meeting: different cultures have
different conventions, and as the group becomes larger or more
adversarial, you'll need something more formal like [Robert's Rules of
Order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert%27s_Rules_of_Order).  But
if there are a dozen people or less, and the session is only supposed
to be an hour long, the outline above will get you a long way.

However…

Some people are so used to the sound of their own voice that they will
insist on talking half the time no matter how many other people are in
the room. One way to combat this is to give everyone three sticky
notes at the start of the meeting. Every time they speak, they have to
take down one sticky note. When they're out of notes, they aren't
allowed to speak until everyone has used at least one, at which point
everyone gets all of their sticky notes back. This ensures that nobody
talks more than three times as often as the quietest person in the
meeting, and completely changes the dynamics of most groups: people
who have given up trying to be heard because they always get trampled
suddenly have space to contribute, and the overly-frequent speakers
quickly realize just how unfair they have been.

Another useful technique is called interruption bingo. Draw a grid,
and label the rows and columns with the participants' names. Each time
someone interrupts someone else, add a tally mark to the appropriate
cell. Halfway through the meeting, take a moment to look at the
results.  In most cases, you will see that one or two people are doing
all of the interrupting, often without being aware of it. After that,
saying, "All right, I'm adding another tally to the bingo card," is
often enough to get them to throttle back.
