# The Prince and the Cloudherd

## A Tiger!

Elena was gathering spider webs in the forest when the soldiers came to
Marandine. It was spring, and while the sun shone diamond-bright in a
clear blue sky, stubborn crusts of snow still lurked in the shadows of
the twisted mountain pines.

"Shoo." She poked a fat brown spider with a stick. It waved its hairy
forelegs at her indignantly before scuttling away to find a new home.
Elena cut the threads that held its web between two branches with two
practiced twists of her knife.

"Do you think I should put new buttons on my coat?" Serita asked.

Elena glanced at her. "Why? Are those ones coming loose?"

"No," Serita said, looking down at her soft brown goatskin coat
critically. "They're just kind of plain. Gram Consuela has some with
little red beads around the edges. She said she'd give them to me if I
picked the stones out of her pepper garden."

"Her whole garden? That would take days." Elena shook the dew off the
spider's web and stuffed it into the loosely-woven bag slung over her
shoulder. "Why would you do all that work for buttons you don't really
need?"

"Oh, you're no help," Serita pouted. She had been embroidering red and
green patterns on her jacket's cuffs and collar all winter. All she
seemed to want to talk about any more was her clothes, and her hair, and
the boys she and Elena might meet that summer.

"A lot of girls are like that when they get their changes," Elena's
grandmother had said when Elena had complained.

"Not me!" Elena had declared.

Her grandmother had laughed. "No, daffodil, not you."

Elena was reaching for another web when a high-pitched voice shouted, "A
tiger! A tiger!"

"Great," she muttered, rolling her eyes at Serita. The whole point of
going out to collect spider webs that morning had been to get *away*
from the smaller children.

Little Diego crashed through a bush, stumbled over a root, then picked
himself up and ran over to the two girls. "There's a tiger in the
village!" he said breathlessly, tugging at her sleeve. "A real tiger!"

"Sure," Elena said wearily. She pulled her arm away and brushed his
dirty fingerprints off her sleeve. "And there's a rock troll under your
bed."

"But it's really there!" Little Diego protested. "And there are
soldiers, too! They've got yellow feathers, and some of them are
bleeding!"

Elena opened her mouth to say, "Why don't you go jump in the fishpond?"
but a deep *boom, boom* cut her off. She and Serita looked at each other
wide-eyed. *Boom, boom*, pause. *Boom, boom*, pause. It was Marandine's
home drum saying, "Come here, come now." It was only ever used for
emergencies, or when someone was lost in a storm and needed help to find
their way home.

Elena dropped her basket on the ground. "Come on!"

"I told you!" Little Diego shouted as she sprinted for home with Serita
at her heels.

"What is it? What's happening?" other children asked as the two girls
ran down the narrow path through the pines toward home. Elena didn't
answer. She didn't slow down, either, until she reached the top of the
ridge above the village and had to pause to catch her breath.

Below her lay the ancient walls of the fortress of Marandine. Rain and
snow had smoothed its edges, making it look like a snow fort that was
just starting to melt, but it was still as solid as the mountain
themselves. The village's two-story wooden houses sheltered inside the
walls like ducklings in a nest. Thin licks of smoke rose from their
slate-sided chimneys.

To the west, the fortress wall dropped straight into a steep-sided
gorge. A net made of spider webs stretched over its top, as light as a
dream but as strong as steel. Another net hung across the gorge's mouth,
a gate for the village's cloud pen. Inside, just visible from the ridge,
a gray bull cloud named Old Blue and a fluffy cow named Pillow floated
half-asleep.

Ever since Elena's changes had started, she had spent every moment she
could watching the two clouds, riding them, and, most importantly,
learning how to mind-talk to them. She even dreamed about them
sometimes. Grownups said they were slow and lazy, but they were the most
exciting things in Elena's world. They, and the herd of half-wild clouds
grazing on the mountain peaks in the distance, were the reason Marandine
existed.

With Elena in the lead, the children who had been gathering webs ran
pell-mell down the path and around the old walls. The drum stopped
booming just as they reached the village square inside the main gate.
Elena skidded to a stop, stumbling forward a step as Serita bumped into
her.

The whole village was there—six hundred people, from babies in their
mothers' arms to Grappa Diego with his cane. A double dozen soldiers
stood at attention in front of them next to the speaker's stump. They
wore steel helmets with plumes of yellow feathers on their crests, and
studded leather breastplates that reached from their shoulders to their
waists. Heavy wool kilts hung down to their knees, where they brushed
against the tops of sturdy black leather boots. Each soldier had a sword
in a scabbard on his hip, and a pack on his back.

And Little Diego had been right: some of them were bleeding, or had been
recently. One man's hand was wrapped in red and white bandages, while
the gash on another's cheek was held closed by three rough field
stitches. Their backs were straight, but none of them had washed or
shaved in days.

Elena didn't see all of that at first, though. Nor did she notice the
single soldier in front of the others who was talking to Elena's mother
Yolanda, or the uniformed boy next to him. Instead, what Elena noticed
first was the black and orange tiger beside them. He had a pair of
golden earrings in his left ear, and his tail was twitching slightly, as
if the villagers reminded him that he had not yet eaten lunch.

Serita tugged at Elena's sleeve. "Why didn't tell us they were coming?"
she whispered accusingly.

"Sh!" Elena whispered back, not willing to admit that she hadn't known.
"I'm trying to hear!"

Yolanda nodded at the soldier she had been listening to and stepped up
onto the speaker's stump. "Friends," she said in a loud voice, patting
the air with her hands to quiet the crowd. "Friends, please. Thank you
all for coming. I know it is early in the year for travellers, but
please, let us bid welcome to His Highness, Evan Prince Ensworth, eldest
son and heir of His Majesty, Peter King Ensworth."

The boy beside the tiger bowed stiffly, ignoring the murmurs from the
crowd. "And this is Sergeant Crimes, of His Majesty's personal guard,"
Yolanda continued, gesturing toward the soldier, "And the Gifted
Kulbinder, also of His Majesty's guard. They will be... They will be our
guests for the next little while."

"How long's a little while?" asked Fernando loudly. Elena winced.
Fernando was the best cloudherd in the village, but some days, a mean
goat could teach him manners.

"Until the pass is safe," Yolanda reassured him. Her eyes swept across
the crowd. "Their journey has been a hard one. I trust we will all make
them welcome. Sergeant? Would you like to say a few words?"

The sergeant stepped up on the stump as Yolanda stepped down and cleared
his throat. His skin was black next to the villagers' dark brown, and
his wiry hair was cut so short that his scalp glistened beneath it. Two
yellow ribbons, exactly the same color as the feathers in his helmet,
were stitched in circles around his left sleeve.

"Um, thank you, reeve," he said. "And, thank you, people of Marandine.
As you know, George Duke Nuthe has raised rebellion against my lord the
king these last three years. My men and I, and His Highness, were caught
in a skirmish near Fast Lake two weeks ago."

A cold breeze whipped his words across the square. "We got cut off from
the rest of the army. We tried to get back to Ensworth, but…well, it
turned out it was the mountains or Nuthe's dungeons, and we figured the
food would be better here."

A few people chuckled, stopping instantly when Fernando raised his
voice. "And who else can we expect to come calling for dinner? Nuthe's
army? This isn't a fortress any longer, you know."

The smile slipped from the sergeant's face. Elena suddenly saw how tired
he was. "We didn't choose Marandine for its walls, sieur. We chose it
because we couldn't go any further. If you're afraid trouble is going to
follow us here, we'll understand if you turn us away."

"Nobody is going to turn anyone away," Yolanda said firmly, glaring at
Fernando. "In fact, I'm sure that everyone will be able to find some
spare blankets or fleeces for your men to sleep under."

"Straight and true," Grappa Diego said loudly from the other side of the
crowd. "We mountain folk take pride in our hospitality." Elena winced
again. Grappa Diego and his son had been quarrelling ever since Fernando
was old enough to bang his fist on a table. They made a point of taking
opposite sides, no matter what the question was.

"And you are famous for it," the sergeant said, bowing slightly. "We
only hope we'll be as good at being guests."

After that, the gathering broke up into bits and pieces. Some villagers
hurried off to find the promised blankets. The rest milled around
awkwardly before excusing themselves to go back to their chores, or to
make cups of tea and gossip. There hadn't been something this exciting
to talk about since a drunken stonemason had driven his cart off the
Porandine bridge the previous fall.

"Why do you think they call him Sergeant Crimes?" Serita asked. "Do you
think he's a criminal?"

"No," said Elena scornfully. "Do you think they'd let a criminal guard
the prince?"

"Maybe he was a murderer, and they let him go if he promised to defend
the prince with his life!" said Serita. "He's so handsome! Don't you
think he's handsome?"

"Oh, Serita! Don't be so stupid!" said Elena crossly, who had been
thinking exactly that.

Ignoring Serita's muttered, "I'm not being stupid," Elena made her way
over to the small knot of people around her mother. Yolanda hardly ever
wore the leather-and-ivory collar that marked her as the village's
reeve, but she had tied it on that afternoon. She turned her best smile
on Grappa Diego. "Diego, could you please show His Highness's men to the
trading hall? They can move the benches and tables to the side if they
want to lay out their bedrolls."

"Be glad to," Grappa Diego said. "Used to know some soldiers, back in
King Edward's time. Good folk, the lot of them." He squared his
shoulders and gave Sergeant Crimes a short nod. "Sergeant? If your men
will follow me?"

"Thank you," the sergeant replied. He turned to his men.
"Attennn…*chun!*" The soldiers, who were already standing as
straight as boards, didn't move.

"By twos, *for'rd!*" The corner of Yolanda's mouth quirked as the
soldiers tramped away in step behind the wiry old man stumping along
with his cane. She turned back to Sergeant Crimes.

"You and the prince can stay in the guesthouse, of course. But it may be
a bit stuffy. No-one has stayed there since last fall."

The sergeant ducked his head. "Begging your pardon, reeve, but I'll be
with my men. Kulbinder will share with the prince."

Yolanda's smile didn't slip. "Of course. I hope you'll all be
comfortable."

The sergeant grinned. He was younger than Elena had first thought. "The
shape we're in, reeve, we could sleep in a bear's cave and use the bear
for a pillow."

"I'm glad we can spare you that," Yolanda replied with a small laugh.
"Oh, and this is my daughter, Elena." She put her hand lightly on
Elena's shoulder. The sergeant nodded a hello. Beside him, the prince
bowed slightly.

Elena nodded in return, studying the prince. He was shorter than she
was, or maybe the plumes on the helmet just made it look that way. His
hair was cut close to his scalp like the sergeant's, and his skin was
the same rich black color. He seem oblivious to the bustle around him as
he scratched the ears of the tiger at his side.

"Your Highness? Sieur tiger? If you'd like to come with me?" Yolanda
asked.

It was the tiger who replied. "With His Highness's permission, I"ll have
a look around first." His voice was so deep that it rumbled, but he
lisped slightly through his sharp teeth. Elena might have teased one of
the village children about it, but not a five-hundred-pound cat with
eyes as orange as the sunset.

"Of course," said the prince. The tiger rose to his feet, stretched, and
padded away toward the fortress gate.

"Your Highness?" Yolanda gestured toward the guesthouse. Elena fell into
step behind them, a hundred questions bubbling up inside her.

"Perhaps once you've rested you would like to see the fortress and our
cloud pen?" Yolanda said.

"Thank you, that would be pleasant." The prince's vowels sounded flat to
Elena's ears. "Perhaps tomorrow?"

"Of course. I've asked Gram Teresa to bring you dinner. Her stewed
chicken is the best in the village. Here we are."

Elena couldn't see the look on the prince's face, but Sergeant Crimes
grinned. "Don't expect we'll have any trouble finding it again," he
said. The guesthouse door was painted bright pink for luck.

The sergeant pushed the door open and stepped inside. Prince Evan waited
patiently until he came out and nodded. "Until later," the prince said,
bowing again before going inside. The sergeant echoed his words, closing
the door behind him.

"Emma?" Elena asked as she and her mother walked back across the square.

"Hm?" Yolanda replied, lost in thought.

A hundred questions—where to start?"Why did the sergeant go in first?"

"I imagine he was looking for assassins," Yolanda said absently.
"Although he's more likely to find mildew." She shook her head to clear
it. "It will have to wait, daffodil," she said as her daughter opened
her mouth to ask another question. "Right now I want you to go home and
make some tea. Use the big pot, and all the honey we have left. I have
the feeling we're going to have lots of visitors today…"

The water hadn't even boiled before Grappa Diego showed up. He rapped on
the door frame with his knuckles and entered without waiting for a
hello. "*Hola*, daffodil. Where's your mother?"

"She should be back in a little," Elena said. She added a handful of tea
leaves to the cinnamon bark and green cardamom pods already in the pot.
It was an extravagance—the other pack traders who brought such
delicacies to the village wouldn't visit until the last of the snow had
melted, which was at least another month away—but Yolanda had always
said that a good cup of tea was worth a thousand words.

"Mind if I sit?" Grappa Diego settled himself on a stool that was at
least as old as he was and watched Elena spoon the last of her mother's
honey into the pot.

"What did you find out?" Elena asked after a moment.

The old man snorted. "Just like your mother, aren't you? And your gram,
too. Always thinking one step ahead of everyone else." He smiled. "You
know, if your gram hadn't been so smart, I might've wound up being your
grappa. I remember once when—"

"Grappa!" Elena cut him off, exasperated and amused at the same time.
"Tell me what the soldiers said!"

"And how do you know they said anything?" Grappa Diego challenged her.

"Because they're a long way from home, and tired, and sore, and want us
all to like them," Yolanda answered, closing the front door behind her.
"And because soldiers like to tell stories almost as much as you do.
Now, what did you find out?" She kissed the old man on his grizzled
cheek and sat on the other stool.

For a moment all Grappa Diego could think of was how alike mother and
daughter looked. They had the same straight black hair, the same round
faces, sharp noses, and dark eyes, and the same quick minds. He still
liked to tell people that he had predicted on Yolanda's tenth birthday
that she would be reeve before she was thirty. *Better start telling
everyone that Elena's going to take the job one day too,* he thought.

"Nuthe's men ambushed them while they were crossing the ford at the
north end of Fast Lake," he told Yolanda. "Just bad luck, but they were
caught on one side of the river when the rest of the army was on the
other." His face darkened. "Half of them stood their ground to give this
lot a chance to get away with the prince. Fellow I was talking to said
he doesn't expect he'll ever see any of them again."

"Did he tell you about their magician?" Yolanda asked. Grappa Diego
shook his head.

Yolanda glanced at Elena. "This doesn't go out of this house," she
warned. Elena nodded, turning to the stove as the lid on the pot rattled
*ting, ting, ting*. She lifted the pot carefully with a forked stick to
pour the boiling water over the tea, then set the teapot on the table to
steep.

"Sergeant Crimes told me that Duke George's men caught up with them two
days later," Yolanda said. She leaned forward, elbows on the table, chin
resting on her doubled fists. "There was a magician with the prince—the
sergeant didn't tell me her name. She spoke with the king, and he told
them to bring the prince up here. Then it was her turn to hold off
Nuthe's men. The sergeant doesn't expect to see her again either."

Grappa Diego frowned. "That would explain the string. Black silk, about
this long," he added, holding his hands apart when Yolanda raised her
eyebrows. "One of the soldiers was putting knots in it when I left, some
sort of code. He'll throw it into the fire when he's done. It'll make a
rack of bells back in Ensworth somewhere ring a tune. It's an expensive
way to say not very much, but if their magician's gone…" His voice
trailed off.

"Was there anything else?" Yolanda asked.

Grappa Diego shrugged. "They said King Peter was winning. I don't think
it was just bluster. Fast Lake is right in the heart of Nuthe." He
snorted again. "About time, after three years. They should have—"

The front door banged open. Fernando strode in and glared at Yolanda.
"How soon are they leaving?" he demanded.

Yolanda straightened up on her stool, but left her elbows on the table.
"Manners like a mean goat," Grappa Diego muttered.

Fernando ignored his father. "How soon, Yolanda? You know you can't let
them stay."

Yolanda stood up slowly. "Make yourself comfortable," she said,
gesturing at her stool. "Elena, leave the tea for a moment, and go and
get the peeling stool from out back. Brush it off before you bring it in
the house."

Fernando glowered at Yolanda a moment longer, then sat down opposite his
father. The short stool creaked in protest under his weight. Despite the
cold, he was only wearing a sleeveless goatskin vest, knee-length wool
shorts, and a sturdy pair of boots. His hair was pulled back in a thick
club braid. His wife Charella had woven a blue ribbon from her wedding
collar into it for luck.

Elena fetched the stool for her mother, then began stirring honey into
the tea as inconspicuously as she could while Fernando counted off the
reasons the Enswer soldiers couldn't stay. What if Nuthe sent an army
after them? Wait, what did he mean "if", of course they would. There
were only six hundred people in Marandine, and only a dozen of them had
ever held a sword. Not that they *had* any swords. And even if Nuthe
didn't come calling, what would the other cloudherd villages think? The
cloudherds had *never* taken sides in the downbelow farmers' wars.

He didn't stop until Elena set a steaming mug of tea in front of him,
and two more in front of his father and Yolanda. Yolanda stared into
hers as if hoping the tiny leaves might spell out some answers. "I know
it's a big thing," she said quietly. "And I *did* think about turning
them away, but look at them. They look like they've been through the
Blight. If a storm caught them in the pass, they wouldn't even make it
as far as Porandine. How would that make us look?"

Fernando frowned. "Hm. Maybe. But it's still a big decision for one
person to make. Reeve or not, you could have asked people what they
thought before letting them settle in. Maybe someone else could have
thought of something."

"I did tell ask people," Yolanda said calmly. "Your father, for one, and
a few others who had blankets they could spare."

Fernando glanced at Grappa Diego, who had a smug look on his face. The
younger man colored slightly. "I still don't think we should let them
stay more than a day or two," he grumbled.

"If you'd *think*," his father snapped, "You'd think about how the
prince's father would have thanked us if we'd turn his son away."

"Please!" Yolanda put up her hands. "The next few days are going to be
hard enough without you two arguing. Duke George has threatened more
than once to stop us from taking rain to Ensworth. No, I don't know how
he'd do it, but he has magicians, and bowmen, and even if he couldn't
stop us completely, he could hurt people, or worse. We didn't ask for
the prince to fetch up on our doorstep, but he has, and I'd hate to hear
people say that Marandine ever turned away a traveller. I admit, I'd be
happier if it was just the prince and a couple of bodyguards, but—"

"But what we've got instead is two dozen mouths to feed when we're
already down to dried apples and barley." Fernando snorted. "Never mind
the tiger. What are we supposed to feed it? Or should I ask 'who'?"

"That's enough!" snapped Grappa Diego. "Like them or not, there's no
call for that kind of talk."

"Hmph!" Fernando snorted. "All I can say is, let's hope there isn't a
late storm, because if there is, *I'm* going to be keeping *my* family
behind a good strong door." He swallowed the rest of his tea in one gulp
and nodded a curt goodbye to Yolanda.

"Maybe it wouldn't be such a bad thing if you were right!" Grappa Diego
called out as his son slammed the door behind himself. "Maybe we'd have
some peace and quiet around here if a few of us *did* get eaten!" He
turned back to Yolanda. "Don't worry about his grumbling. Or anyone
else's, for that matter. You're the reeve until the village votes
otherwise, and we'll all back you in this."

"Thank you," Yolanda smiled. "I appreciate it."

Grappa Diego smiled back, then drained the last of his tea. "It's good,"
he said to Elena. "Maybe wants more cinnamon next time, though."

"I'll try to remember," Elena promised.

Yolanda stood when Grappa Diego did. "Will you stay for dinner?"

He shook his head and grinned. "Thanks, girl, but I promised your mother
I'd help her peel some potatoes." Yolanda smiled and kissed him on the
cheek again. He was humming as he left.

Elena waited until her mother said down again before saying,
"Mother…?"

"Yes, daffodil?"

Elena hesitated. She didn't know where to start. "What's an assassin?"
she finally asked.

Yolanda sighed. "Someone who kills people for money," she said. "Not
just soldiers, but anyone. Sometimes they use poison or traps, but
mostly they sneak into people's houses at night and strangle them when
they're asleep. I think. I don't really know."

Elena shivered. "Do you think one is going to come looking for the
prince?"

Yolanda shook her head. "I hope not. No-one is supposed to know he's
here. They came by back roads, and through the forest, so that Duke
George wouldn't know where to find them." She frowned. "And I imagine
their magician did what she could, too. Poor woman."

"But what about what Fernando said? About Duke George sending an army
after him?"

Yolanda sighed. "I don't know, daffodil, I just don't know. He might.
Some people say he drowned his own brother, but others think the world
of him."

"I thought we weren't supposed to take sides."

Her mother sighed again. "If we turned Prince Evan away, we'd be taking
Duke George's side, wouldn't we? Now, tell me, did you get some spider
webs, or did you and Serita spend the whole day mooning after Martino?"

"Oh, *emma*! How can you think about spider webs on a day like this? And
anyway, Serita's the one who's mooning after Martino and that stupid
moustache he's trying to grow. *I* think it's dumb."

"Well, whoever's doing what, the nets needed to be mended before we can
bring the clouds down for the summer. If we don't get that done, we
might as well all stay home."

"I suppose." Elena ran her finger around the bottom of her tea cup to
catch the last of the honey.

Her mother smiled at her. "Maybe tomorrow you can show the prince the
village instead of picking webs. But you have to get your reading
lessons done for Gram Teresa first."

The other children ambushed Elena as soon as she stepped into the school
hall an hour later. "How come you didn't tell us they were coming?"
Serita asked accusingly.

Elena opened her mouth to to confess that she hadn't known, but closed
it with a snap when Martino said, "Don't be silly! Her mother must have
sworn her to secrecy." Martino should have gone cloudherding when his
changes came the year before, but he had broken his leg chasing after a
goat, and had spent the summer learning how to play the fiddle instead.
He wasn't ever going to be as big as Fernando, but he was the only boy
in the village with wavy hair, and he had a *very* nice smile.

*I am **[not]{} mooning after him,*** Elena thought firmly. Out loud,
she said, "Mmm. What did you think of the tiger? Doesn't he look
fierce?"

Everyone agreed. They spent the next five minutes describing the
soldiers to one another, even though they'd all seen them. It was
absolutely the most exciting thing that had ever happened, except maybe
for when Old Blue and Thrown Stone had nearly wrecked the cloud pen the
year before last, fighting to see who would be the lead bull in the
herd.

"We should do something to welcome him," Elena finally said.

"Like making him a present?" Serita suggested.

"No," said Elena scornfully. "What could we make that he wouldn't
already have? He's a prince."

They were still trying to think of something when Gram Teresa came
puffing in. "All right, enough chit-chat," she said. "Who can tell me
words—*different* words, not all the same—that all start with the letter
'da'?" The children all groaned. As Gram Teresa began a slow lap around
the class, Elena let her mind wander to the tiger and the soldiers. She
wondered if her father had become a soldier after he left Marandine. He
would be a brave one, she was sure. A sergeant, with extra ribbons on
his sleeve. It didn't occur to her to wonder which side he'd be on.

## Assassins!

"Oh, Elena, brush your hair!" Yolanda her tea down on the table and
started to stand.

"I can do it," Elena said. "I'm not a baby." She dragged the brush she
and her mother shared through her hair another few times. "Is that
better?"

Her mother sighed, just as her own mother once had. "Yes, I suppose.
Honestly, someone would think you'd been possessed by lightning. Now
come on. We don't want to keep them waiting."

They walked through the village together, squinting against the
sharp-edged morning sun. The air smelled faintly of pine smoke and fried
eggs. People were sitting in twos and threes on stools outside their
houses wearing goatskin jackets or thick sweaters above sturdy trousers
and sturdier boots. The men knitted or peeled potatoes while the women
picked spider webs apart apart and wound the strands onto spools.

Every dozen strides, Yolanda had to stop to answer the same questions.
How were the soldiers getting on? What did the prince think of the
village? "We're on our way to ask," she replied over and over again.

The only sour face was Fernando's. "Has that tiger eaten anyone yet?" he
asked, but his heart wasn't in it. His year-old daughter was sitting up
in his lap, trying to pull a polished wooden button off his shirt. She
stared at Elena for a moment, wide-eyed and open-mouthed, then buried
her face in her father's chest. Fernando smiled and kissed the top of
her head, the soldiers momentarily forgotten.

Elena was so impatient by the time they reached the guesthouse that she
was almost hopping from one foot to the other. She knew that listening
to people was the most important part of being reeve, and her mother
liked doing it anyway, but what if the prince was waiting? Or worse,
what if someone else was already showing him the village?

She needn't have worried. Sergeant Crimes was sitting on the guesthouse
steps. Half the village's children were sitting cross-legged on the
stones in front of him, Serita and Martino among them.

"And this is called a greave," the sergeant said, pointing at the armor
on his shin. "It's to protect me from vampire mice. See?" He tapped it
with his fingernail, *clunk*. "They could bite that aaaaaall they
wanted."

"What if they climbed up your leg?" asked Serita. Elena rolled her eyes.
Serita *always* asked the questions grownups wanted someone to ask.

"Ah, well, then I'd—oh, hello, reeve." The sergeant stood up, brushing
his hands on his kilt. "His Highness will be out in a heartbeat."

"Thank you, sergeant," said Yolanda. "My daughter is looking forward to
showing him the village. I trust you slept well?"

"Yes, thank you," said the sergeant. "Although I…" He blinked, then
sniffed, then started to say, "Excuse me," but the sneeze came first.
*Hwah!* One of the younger children giggled, then clapped her hand over
her mouth. The sergeant blinked and sniffed again. "Sorry—too many
nights in the rain."

"Visitors from down below often catch colds in our thin air," said
Yolanda sympathetically. "I hope it passes quickly."

The sergeant nodded, but before he could reply, the guesthouse door
opened behind him. The children scrambled to their feet and stepped back
as the tiger padded out into the sunlight. He wasn't as big as he had
been in Elena's dreams—his head would only have come to her ribs, and
his shoulders were actually rather narrow—but she still had to stop
herself from reaching for her mother's hand.

Almost unnoticed, the prince came out behind him and closed the door.
Instead of his armor, he wore a plain brown rain cape over his kilt and
boots. "Good morning, reeve." He *did* have an accent, Elena decided.
His 'morning' came out 'marning', and his 'reeve' sounded more like
'rave'. She wondered how long it would be before Serita started talking
that way.

"Good morning, Your Highness," Yolanda replied. "I trust you also slept
well?"

"Thank you, I did." The prince seemed not to notice that thirty pairs of
eyes were staring at him. *He must be used to it,* Elena thought.

Yolanda waited a moment to see if he would say anything more. When he
didn't, she smiled once again and said, "My daughter has asked if she
could show you our village while the other children do their chores."
Elena heard Martino mutter something at that. "If you three would like
to accompany her, I'm sure you'll find it—oh dear." She stopped
mid-sentence as the sergeant took a deep breath and scrunched up his
eyes. Everyone held their breath as he held his, relaxing when he let it
out and shook his head. "Nope," he said, blinking. "That one's not ripe
yet."

"You'd be better in bed than tramping around the countryside," Kulbinder
rumbled.

"I agree," said Yolanda firmly. "My mother will make you some lemon
ginger tea. That will set you right in no time."

"Thang you," the sergeant said stuffily. "Your Highness?"

The prince nodded. "Of course. I hope you feel better by the time we
return. I would hate to miss a lesson."

And so they set off. Elena and the prince walked side by side, the tiger
padding along behind them. "That's the South Tower," said Elena,
pointing at six rectangular stories of stone. "It still has a roof, but
the stairs inside fell down a long time ago. You used to be able to get
up there by climbing a tree, but they cut it down after Grappa Diego
broke his leg. That was before I was born. And that one's the Round
Tower, and the short one over there is called the Quick Tower, because
it's quickest to get up."

"It's a shame they've been allowed to go to ruin," said the prince. "My
father's engineers work year round to keep the walls of Ensworth Castle
sturdy."

"Well, it's been a long time, I guess," said Elena.

"Perhaps when I'm king I could send some engineers up here to fix them,"
said the prince.

"That would be nice," Elena replied vaguely. She wondered how Fernando
would feel about having a king's engineers clambering around the
village's wall. "Oh, and that's Gram Teresa's house, with the moss green
door. She's my mother's mother. She's teaching us how to read and count
money. And that's Grappa Diego's house, the lavender one. He used to be
reeve. And that's, um, well, they're all just different people's
houses." Elena fell silent. The prince had a polite but absent, look on
his face, just like the one Yolanda got when Grappa Diego started
talking about how things had been in his day. *It's probably not much
compared to a real castle,* she thought glumly. Two-story houses with
steep shingled roofs, little vegetable gardens nestled between logs laid
parallel a stride apart, and all around, sharp mountain peaks looming
over the ancient gray walls… She wouldn't have believed how strange
it seemed to the lowland prince.

They walked in silence along the path that ran along the base of the
fortress walls. The original cobblestones showed through the hard-packed
dirt in a few places. Elena scuffed crusts of frost off a few
absent-mindedly, wondering what else she could say.

Suddenly Kulbinder pushed between the two children, freezing in front of
them with one paw in the air. "What is that?" the tiger rumbled
menacingly.

A heavy wooden grill lay across a shoulder-high opening in the wall
ahead of them. Behind it, rough stone steps led down into the mountain.

"That's just some old tunnels," said Elena. "We're not supposed to go
in. Most of them—Fernando *says* that most of them are flooded. Except
for the one under Grappa Diego's house, and the ones by the drying
sheds. We use them for cellars."

The tiger padded up to the tunnel mouth and sniffed at it. After a
moment he turned his head to look back at Elena with his bright orange
eyes. She shivered. Like every other child in the village (except
Serita, who couldn't stand getting dirty), Elena had sneaked into the
tunnels more than once on a dare. As fast as the adults put bars over
the entrances, the children found ways around them. As the tiger's stare
lengthened, Elena wondered if his nose was so sensitive that he could
smell faint traces of her in the tunnel, or faint traces of the tunnel
on her.

But then Kulbinder blinked. "The sergeant will have to take a look at
these." He flowed away down the path.

Elena shivered again. "Is he dangerous?" she whispered to the prince.

"Oh, certainly," the prince whispered back. "That's why he's my
bodyguard. Isn't that right, Kulbinder?"

The prince had been as quiet as Elena, but the tiger rumbled, "Yes, Your
Highness," without turning his head.

Elena's cheeks turned warm. "Well," she said in a louder-than-normal
voice, "I guess if we run into any trolls today, they'll be the ones to
worry."

"Are there really trolls up here?" the prince asked. He sounded
genuinely interested for the first time. "There aren't any left in
Ensworth. Or any of the other Marches, except Derway and Bruyere. I've
only seen a stuffed one, in the trophy room in the castle."

"Oh, there are trolls, all right," Elena assured him, but honesty made
her add, "But it's been a long time since any came anywhere near the
village." She frowned, sorting midwinter stories in her head. "It was my
other grandmother's father, I think. Or maybe her grandfather. A whole
pack of them moved into a cave somewhere up the pass and started
stealing goats. He snuck up on them on a cloud and caught the biggest
one in a net and dropped it into the pass. The others ran away after
that. I think he was reeve after that," she finished vaguely.

"It sounds like your family has ruled this village a long time," the
prince said. "You must be very proud. My family has ruled Ensworth for
eight generations."

Elena could have explained that the reeve didn't actually rule anything,
they sort of persuaded, and that the reeveship didn't belong to any one
family. What she said instead was, "Oh, we've been here *forever*. I
mean, since the Age of Heroes, anyway. Every Yearagain Eve, Gram Teresa
tells the story of how the first families learned to ride clouds so that
they could escape from being slaves in Uws. Their first reeve was named
Elena," she added proudly. "She went on thirty-two roundups. Her name's
on the lintel stone in the trading hall."

"You must be very proud," the prince repeated politely, as he pulled up
an early fern and swished it like a sword.

Elena opened her mouth to say, "Yes, actually, I am," but closed it with
a snap instead.

The steps up to the top of the wall lay flush against its side. Each one
was as high as Elena's knee, and so broad that it took her three strides
to reach the next one. Even after thousands of years, the stones in the
walls fit together so snugly that it was hard to tell where one ended
and the next began.

Elena put her left hand on the wall to steady herself each time she
thrust herself up a stair. The tiger took the stairs as easily as a leaf
bobbing over rapids in a stream. The prince had a harder time—Elena
noticed smugly that he was puffing and sweating after only a few steps.

The top of the wall was wide enough for three soldiers to march side by
side. A smaller wall stood guard on its outer edge, interrupted here and
there by slits for lookouts and archers. Kulbinder reared up and braced
his forepaws against the stones to look through. The wind they had been
sheltered from down below rippled the fur on his back.

"Porandine is up that way," Elena said, pointing. "You can't see it
because the valley bends, but sometimes you can see their clouds coming
out of their pen." The three of them gazed in silence at the long,
narrow valley that led north toward Uws and the Herd of Trees. The
sunlight reflecting off the snow on the peaks around them was almost
painfully bright.

"Have you ever ridden a cloud?" the prince asked, looking south toward
the plains.

"Lots of times," Elena replied offhandedly. "Ever since I was little.
I've been herding Old Blue all by myself for months now, and I'm going
on the roundup this summer."

"Who's Old Blue?" the prince asked.

Elena smiled. "Come on, I'll show you."

They walked around the wall to the stairs by the main gate. From there,
a well-worn path ran along the base of the wall and into the forest.
Tiny rose-colored buds speckled the knee-high mountain heather, and
green leaves the size of Elena's fingernail had opened up overnight on
the hawkweed. She pointed at a white-headed jay, and at a squabbling
pair of chickadees with black stripes over their eyes. The prince asked
about what they ate, when the other plants around them would start to
bloom, and whether chickadees made good pets.

"Only if you like pets that are really noisy, and really stupid," Elena
told him. He smiled for the first time.

The path took them to a wooden platform overlooking the gorge that lay
beneath the fortress's west wall. Elena thundered across it in three
quick steps and leaned over the railing. "That's Old Blue," she pointed.
"And that's Pillow."

The two old clouds were hardly moving, but Elena could still have
watched them for hours. In mid-summer, when the grownups (*and me,* she
thought) brought the rest of the herd down from the mountaintops, the
pen would be so crowded that it would be hard to tell where one cloud
ended and the next began.

She loved the way they slowly changed shape as they drifted about, and
how soft they felt when she stroked them. Being up in the sky on a cloud
was like riding on a grownup's shoulders when you were little, only a
thousand times better. You could see everything—deer grazing beneath the
twisted pines, mountain goats standing on rocky ledges no wider than the
heel of your boot, broad-winged condors circling patiently, waiting for
a rabbit to forget to look up… And when the air was still, and the
cloud was just drifting, the only sound you heard was your own
breathing.

The first time Elena had been allowed to take Old Blue out of the pen by
herself, she had felt like the whole world was a story that was about to
be told for the very first time. And this summer, she was finally
(finally!) old enough to help drive the clouds out over the plains to
bring rain to the downbelow kingdoms.

Kulbinder stuck his head between two posts and sniffed. "They smell like
damp sheep."

"That's because they haven't rained for a while," Elena explained
defensively. "Martino and I will probably take them out tomorrow and let
them rain over the fish pond. Here, come with me. There are stairs down
the side."

She took the stairs two at a time and walked boldly across the lower
landing, the prince and the tiger almost forgotten behind her. Just a
few strides away from the bigger of the two clouds, she stopped and
closed her eyes. "Come," she mind-spoke. Nothing happened.

"Come!" she mind-spoke again, more urgently. Old Blue started to drift
toward them. She opened her eyes. The prince was looking at her oddly,
and Kulbinder's tail was thrashing back and forth.

"I've been practicing all winter," she said proudly.

"Practicing what?" the prince asked.

"Mind-speaking to the clouds," she said. "Grappa Diego started teaching
me last summer, when I got my changes. You know, my woman's changes,"
she added when the prince blushed. "Oops!" She closed her eyes again and
mind-spoke, "Stop!" Old Blue bumped against the landing with a sound
like wet laundry.

Elena stroked the old bull's flank. "See?" she said. "You can pull bits
of them this way and that, but it all settles back into a big lump after
a while." She grabbed a handful of Old Blue's side and pulled as hard as
she could. When she let go, the bit she had teased out slowly sank back
into the cloud.

The prince patted the cloud gingerly. "I thought they'd be bigger," he
said. "Like a whale."

"What's a whale?" Elena asked.

"It's like a fish, but bigger than a house," the prince told her.
"Bigger even than clouds, sometimes."

Elena looked sideways at the prince. She wondered if he was pulling her
leg. "A fish that's bigger than a cloud?" she asked doubtfully. "Where
would it swim?"

"In the ocean," the prince said. "I saw some when I was travelling with
my father. They had big gray fins, like wings. They sang for us one
night."

"If you say so," said Elena skeptically.

The prince's frowned and took his hand away from Old Blue. "Well, maybe
when you're older, you'll have a chance to do some travelling and see
some whales for yourself."

"I expect I'll do a lot more travelling than you will," Elena replied
tartly. "Cloudherds get to go everywhere, even as far as the Karaband
and, and Thind, and everywhere else."

Kulbinder rumbled softly. Prince Evan dropped his hand to the tiger's
head and scratched his ears. "Perhaps it's time to return to the
village," the prince said coolly.

"If you want," Elena replied, her tone just as cool. "It's almost time
for lunch, anyway."

They climbed the stairs to the upper landing in silence. When they
reached it, Kulbinder suddenly growled, "Stay here," and shot into the
trees. The prince stopped.

"What's wrong?" asked Elena.

"I don't know," the prince said. "But when he tells me to stay put, I'm
supposed to stay put. It's for my own protection," he added sourly.

An evil thought popped into Elena's head. "Maybe it's an assassin," she
said casually.

The prince jumped as if he had been stung. "What?" he demanded. "Why do
you think it's an assassin?"

"Oh, I don't know." Elena shrugged. "It's just that I heard someone
saying that they saw a stranger on the road last night. They didn't know
who he was—it's too early in the season for traders, and anyway, he was
dressed all in black. I'm sure whoever it was will be long gone by now."

The prince stared at her wide-eyed. Elena barely had time to realize
that he was truly frightened before he pulled a small whistle from his
pocket and blew it as hard as he could. *Phweeet!*

Kulbinder came crashing through the undergrowth with a roar. "Your
Highness!" he snarled. "What hail?"

"We are betrayed," the prince told him. He pointed a trembling finger at
Elena. "These people are harboring an assassin!"

## Three Games

"What!?" the tiger snarled. He turned to Elena. "What do you know of
this?"

"Nothing!" Elena exclaimed, taking a step back. The tiger's glare was
frightening, and his teeth were worse. "I don't know anything about any
assassins!"

"She told me the villagers had seen a man in black on the road," the
prince said. "A man who travelled by night."

"Rrrr…" the tiger rumbled. "The reeve said nothing of this." His
tail snapped back and forth. Finally his eyelids drooped slightly.
"Perhaps we should return to the village," he said, "And have another
conversation with the reeve."

Elena's stomach was churning by the time they got back to the main
square. She stumbled on the cobblestones, trying to hold back her tears.
She hadn't meant to *scare* him—not really… Now what was she going
to do?

The trio found Yolanda talking to Gram Consuela about her pepper garden.
The tiger's story was brief, and the prince's briefer. Yolanda looked at
Elena angrily.

"A man in black?" she asked her daughter. "Who told you that?"

"I don't remember," said Elena. Hot tears stung her eyes. *I will not
cry in front of him,* she told herself angrily. *I will not!*

"We'll speak about this later," the reeve said to her daughter coldly.
She turned to the tiger and the prince. "On behalf of my daughter, and
this village, I apologize," she said. "I haven't heard of any such
traveller, and I don't believe anyone else has either. I'm sorry for the
worry you've been caused."

"Rrrr… Well, perhaps it's not altogether a bad thing," the tiger
replied. "Even here, shouldn't take any chances. I'll speak with
Sergeant Crimes about having some soldiers watch the gate and the walls.
Your Highness? I think we should return to our quarters."

With a bow to Yolanda, the prince followed the tiger toward the
guesthouse. Elena clenched her hands into fists, wishing she could just
throw herself on her bed and wait for it all to be over. Her mother
stood for a moment, not speaking, and then said, "I didn't think I'd
raised a liar."

The tears finally came. "He started it!" Elena cried. "He was telling
all kinds of stories about fish as big as houses and how they could
sing, and, and then he got all snooty when I didn't believe him and
I… I…"

"I don't care if he tells you he eats dragon eggs for breakfast!"
Yolanda said angrily. She didn't seem to care that Gram Consuela was
listening just a few feet away. "You don't lie to people, especially
about things like that! I spent the whole morning telling everyone that
Sergeant Crimes and his men are no different from any other guests the
village has ever had, and that having them here doesn't mean we're
taking sides in King Peter's war. And now I'm going to have to let them
put guards on our walls as if this was a prison! Oh, Elena, this is the
last thing I wanted!"

"I'm—I'm sorry," Elena sniffled. "But he was telling stories!"

"Well, then, let him tell stories. Let him chew the paint off old doors
like a goat if he wants to. Just don't do it yourself."

"Yes, reeve," Elena said wretchedly.

"Don't you 'yes, reeve' me. Now, Charella swapped us some thimbleberries
for those old boots you'd outgrown. I want you to get the seeds out so
that I can make a pie for dinner. You'd better wash your face first,
though."

"Thimbleberries?" Elena said in despair. "But that'll take forever!
Martino and Serita and I were going to take Pillow out this afternoon!"

"Well, you should have thought of that before you started telling
stories about assassins, shouldn't you?" The reeve took Elena by the
shoulders, wondering yet again when she had grown so tall. "Elena,
Elena, listen to me. *Really* listen to me. What you did today was
really bad. There really are people looking for the prince, and they
really will try to kill him if they find him." She sighed, combing her
daughter's hair off her forehead with her fingers. "Half the village is
already muttering about it being time for a new reeve. How can I ask
them to behave when my own daughter won't? Now, go get washed up and
start on those thimbleberries."

Elena nodded. She didn't know which was worse: not getting to ride
Pillow, or knowing that Martino and Serita would be alone together for
the whole afternoon.

She moped home to collect the bucket full of hard red thimbleberries and
a large bowl, then climbed the steps to the top of the Quick Tower. She
and Serita had covered a tumbled-down block of stone with a bit of gray
canvas to make a pretend cloud the year before. Plopping herself down on
it, she started squeezing bitter grain-sized seeds out of the
thimbleberries one by one. "See more of the world than *you* will," she
muttered bitterly. Why couldn't the stupid prince have found somewhere
else to hide? And why did the sun have to be so…so sunny?

When she heard the first shouts from the main square she ignored them,
thinking that it was just children playing jump-sticks or kabbadi. Then
she heard Sergeant Crimes shout, "Hah! Heeeyah!" She tossed another
berry into the bowl and stood up on her stone seat to look over the
wall.

She was just in time to see Prince Evan duck under the sergeant's
out-thrust sword and lunge with his own blade as he straightened up,
shouting "Hah!" in turn. Every child in the village was gathered around
watching, and not a few of the adults as well.

The sergeant knocked the prince's blade away and spun around, slashing
left and right, one, two, three, as if he was fighting an invisible
opponent. While his back was turned the prince stepped forward and
stabbed the sergeant in the ribs.

The sergeant groaned, pinning the prince's sword with his arm so that it
was pulled out of Evan's grip as Crimes turned. The prince only had time
to open his mouth before the sergeant's sword tapped him lightly in the
chest. To Elena's disgust, the children started to clap.

"You must keep your grip even after you strike, Your Highness," the
sergeant said, panting slightly. "No point giving your man one last
blow."

"I know," said the prince. "I forgot." The sergeant handed his sword
back to him. Elena saw that both blades were wrapped in leather so that
they wouldn't cut. They were smaller than Elena had imagined: each was
only as long as its owner's arm, and no thicker than a pottery plate.

The prince and the sergeant brought their swords up slowly, touched
blades with one another, and started fighting again. The prince lost
quickly this time, but won the third round when the sergeant pretended
to stumble over a loose cobblestone.

They practiced for almost half an hour. The children clapped and
cheered, but Elena saw some of the older villagers shake their heads.
She could almost hear them muttering (as they so often did) that so much
noise and commotion was sure to wake every ghost who had ever walked the
fortress walls. Still, they kept watching.

By the time the sergeant and the prince stopped, they were both soaked
with sweat. They saluted each other one last time. "You're getting
better every day, Your Highness," Sergeant Crimes said. "Looks like we
could both use a wash-up, though."

The prince nodded, still breathing hard. "Smells like we could both use
one too," he said. Elena saw him smile for the second time.

"Show me, show me!" shouted Little Diego. He clapped his hands with
excitement. "I want to do it!"

The prince's smile froze. He glanced at the sergeant, who shook his head
almost imperceptibly. "I'm glad you liked it," the prince said to Little
Diego. His clear voice carried right across the village square. "Perhaps
we could do it some other time."

He reversed his sword and handed it to the sergeant, who began to unwrap
the leather. The prince squatted so that he was no taller than Little
Diego. "But I can show you something else if you like," the prince said.
He looked left, then looked right, as if to make sure no spies or
grownups were listening.

"Do you have any spare socks at home?" the prince asked. Little Diego
nodded. "Good. You go and get me three pairs of socks, quick as you can,
and three stones the size of your thumb."

Little Diego bit his lip. "I only have just one other pair of socks," he
said. "They're for when it's winter, so my feet will fit in my boots."

The prince's mouth opened, and closed, and opened again. "Well," he
said, "Do you think your mother would let you borrow some of hers? Just
for a little bit?" Little Diego nodded quickly and scurried away.

"Do you want the rest of us to get some socks, too?" Serita asked
uncertainly.

"Oh, Serita!" Elena said under her breath.

"If you like," the prince said, straightening up. Serita spun around and
ran for home. A handful of other children ran off as well.

Prince Evan stepped over to Sergeant Crimes to take back his sword.
"Just two pair of socks?" the prince muttered. "With what my father pays
for rain? Perhaps when I'm king I should pay them with socks instead of
gold."

"With what traders charge them for beans and apples, they're lucky to
have socks at all," the sergeant muttered back. He waited a moment
longer than necessary before letting go of the prince's sword. The
prince looked at him, startled, then dropped his eyes.

Little Diego came puffing back a moment later. In his hands he had one
pair of green socks, one pair of gray, and one pair with red and white
stripes on them. "Will these do?" he asked, fishing some stones out of
his pocket.

"They look fine," said the prince. "Now, give me your stones… Good.
Now, the first thing we do is we roll up the socks like this, with a
stone in the middle, to make a ball. See? And then the next pair…
And the next… Now, are you ready?" Little Diego nodded.

The prince stepped back, took a deep breath, and threw the balled-up
socks into the air. His hands darted back and forth like hummingbirds.
Somehow, he managed to catch each sock ball before it fell to the
ground, and then throw it again in time to catch the next one. He caught
them overhand, he caught them underhand, he threw two with his left hand
while bouncing the third with his right, and then he threw them all in
the air at once and caught them, one, two, three.

There was a moment of stunned silence. "That's magic!" Martino said
accusingly. "You're doing magic!"

"It's not magic," Grappa Diego laughed, looking as delighted as any of
the children. "It's juggling! I saw it in Derway once, years ago. It's
just a trick."

"That's right," the prince agreed, "It's just a trick. Here, I'll prove
it. Sergeant?"

Sergeant Crimes took the brightly colored sock balls from the prince and
tossed them in the air, one, two, three. He whistled a happy little tune
as he juggled, and even managed to wink at Serita (who blushed). By the
time he was finished, Little Diego was laughing and clapping his hands.
"Let me, let me!" he shrieked. "I want to!"

"All right, but you have to let me show you how," the prince said. He
looked at the other children with a practiced smile. "You have to start
with just two, like this. Um, Sergeant? Could you show the older
children how it's done? Thank you. Now, put this one in this hand, and
this one in the other, and…"

Elena watched Little Diego drop all three pairs of socks, pick them up,
and drop them again. The little boy laughed. Seething, she sat back down
on her improvised cloud and glared at the bowl of thimbleberries. It was
going to be a long afternoon…

A few hours later, Elena sat on her stool outside her back door,
knitting so furiously it was amazing the yarn didn't take fright and try
to run away. Serita didn't seem to notice her friend's scowl. "You
should have tried it!" she burbled. "I only got them all up a few times,
but it was so much fun! Martino could do it almost right away, except
for some of the special things like two in one hand."

"I'm sure it was wonderful," Elena grumbled.

"Oh, Elena," Serita pouted. "Don't be such a huckleberry."

"I'm not being a huckleberry!" Elena glared at her friend. "I just think
he was showing off. What did Martino think about him putting his arms
around you like that?" Elena had gotten up to look at the juggling
several times. The last time, the prince had been standing behind
Serita, so close that his nose was in her hair, reaching around to hold
her arms just below the elbows. The look on Serita's face had suggested
that she hadn't really been paying attention to what the prince had been
saying.

Serita brushed her hair back over her ear and grinned. "Why should I
care what Martino thinks?" she asked sweetly. Her grin turned into a
leer. "Or maybe you're the one who cares?"

Elena's knitting needles went *click, clack*. "Well, *I* think it was
embarrassing," she said primly. "You were all following him around like
ducklings, just because he knew a stupid trick."

"Well, at least he didn't make everyone say please nine times, like you
did when I wanted to play with the whirlidoodle Gram Teresa got you for
your nameday last year!"

Elena's mouth fell open. Serita had never talked back to her before!

The same thought must have occurred to Serita. She blushed and glanced
down at the scarf taking shape in Elena's lap. "Wow, you've got a lot
done," she said vaguely. She lowered her voice. "But I heard what
happened this morning. Did the tiger really pounce on you?"

"No!" Elena said, exasperated. "He didn't pounce at all. Oh, this is
stupid! Here." She grabbed the spare stool by the leg and dragged it
over. "If you want to gossip, you might as sit down."

"Hmph!" Serita brushed her hair back over her ear. "I wasn't gossiping,
I was just asking. Anyway, I can't stay. We're going to teach the prince
how to play Snakes and Whistles."

"Snakes and Whistles? He must know how to play that!"

"Nuh uh. We were talking about it while we were juggling, and he said
he'd never even heard of it. I guess they play different games down on
the plains."

"I guess," Elena echoed dubiously. She looked down at her knitting,
pursed her lips, then stood up abruptly. "Well? What are we waiting for?
Let's go show him how to play!"

By unspoken agreement, Elena and Serita didn't go straight through the
main square—there was no point drawing Yolanda's attention to the fact
that her daughter had set her chores aside. Instead, they picked their
way through the stakes and strings in Gram Consuela's pepper garden,
held their breath as they snuck past the tanning shed, and slipped
through the fortress gate as quietly as shadows.

By the time they reached the clearing where the other children had
gathered, Martino was explaining the last of the rules to the prince.
"But if you can run all the way back without getting whistled again,
then you're safe," he said. "I think that's everything."

"What's out of bounds?" someone asked.

"The heather bush, the ponderosa, the lizard rock, and the pile of
pinecones," Martino said, pointing at each landmark in turn.

"Did you tell him about not making two snakes at once?" Elena asked.

Everyone groaned. "Oh, we're not going to play like that, are we?"
Serita pouted. "It takes forever! Anyway, who's going to be captain?"

"Um, Your Highness?" Martino asked, clearly feeling awkward about saying
the strange phrase to a real person. "Would you…?"

"Thank you, but I think I should wait and see how the game is played
first," the prince replied. "Would you and the reeve's daughter like to
do it?" He kept his eyes on Martino and added, "I would of course be
grateful if you would choose me for your team."

Elena felt her face go red. Serita, not noticing, said, "Oh, they're
always captains," but everyone else was already scrambling to the corner
markers.

The first game only lasted a few minutes. The prince ran straight for
the middle of the field, but was whistled out almost at once. Elena
whistled around Martino a moment later while he was trying to explain
what had happened to the prince. After that, his team couldn't get more
than two or three children into a snake before being whistled by someone
from Elena's team.

Then Elena and her team were the snakes, and suddenly, things stopped
going so well. The prince changed direction like a rabbit trying to
escape from a cat, and seemed to be everywhere at once. He whistled
Elena almost right away, then managed to put three other children out in
as many breaths.

They played until only Serita was left. She feinted to the right, then
tried to run to the left, but the prince stayed right in front of her.
The other children cheered her on, shouting, "Back up! Come on, Serita!
Make a hoop on him!" but she just couldn't find an opening. The grin on
her face made it plain how much fun she was having being trapped.

Finally she feinted left, hesitated just an instant as if to go right,
then carried on to the left instead. The prince stumbled and went down
on one knee with a grunt. Serita raced past him, then slowed, stopped,
turned around, walked back to him, and stuck out her hand to help him
up. Everybody was cheering.

"Looks like a tie," Martino said to Elena.

"A tie?" Elena exclaimed. "There's no such thing as a tie!"

"There is now," he replied. "You're not the only one who gets to make up
rules, you know."

"No, no, she's right," the prince panted. "I'm beaten, fair and square."
He picked up a fallen pine branch. Serita made a little 'oh!' of
surprise as the prince saluted, turned the stick end-over-end, handed it
to her, and went down on one knee in front of her.

"I'm surrendering," he explained. "Now you break my sword over your knee
and hand me back the hilt. That's how you accept my surrender."

Serita snapped the branch in half, then hesitated. "Which end is the
hilt?" she asked.

"It's the handle end," the prince explained. "It doesn't really matter."
Serita gave him the shorter piece of the stick. The prince accepted it
gravely, then tucked it into his belt and stood up. As he did so, Elena
saw him catch Martino's eye and wink. Martino grinned and winked back,
as if sharing a joke at the expense of all girls everywhere. Elena could
have punched them both.

"What happens if she doesn't accept your surrender?" Martino asked.

"Oh, she has to accept it," the prince said. "Nobody would follow a king
who didn't fight by the rules."

"What about if he made them up as he went along?" Elena muttered, just
loudly enough for everyone else to hear.

"Then they wouldn't be rules, would they?" he said, smiling exactly the
way Yolanda did when Grappa Diego had one of his 'ideas'.

"So," the prince continued before Elena could think of a suitable
retort, "How many clouds does your village have? I've seen them every
summer, but I don't know how to tell one village's herd from another."

"The clouds don't belong to any particular village," Martino explained
as he sat down on a dry patch of moss and leaned back against the trunk
of an old black oak. "Everybody just goes up into the mountains at the
start of summer and rounds up as many clouds as it can. If you can get a
big bull early on, other clouds will follow it down, but that means
climbing while there's still a lot of snow."

"We spend the whole winter making spider web nets to catch them," Serita
added. "It's *so* boring."

"I'm sure," the prince said. He sat down against a tree like Martino and
began to twist an early leaf of candlegrass around his finger over and
over. "When will the reeve decide who's going and staying?"

"She doesn't decide," Elena said shortly. "She can't just order people
around like a king."

"The reeve stays here to deal with the traders," Martino said into the
awkward silence that followed. "Summer is the only time they can get
their carts up the pass. Usually Fernando takes charge of whoever's
going on the round-up. It used to be Grappa Diego, but he's too old now
for the climbing. All he does is talk about the fish pond and his—"

"—wonderful new footbridge," Serita finished with him. She laughed at
the baffled look on the prince's face. "He spent all last summer bossing
everyone around while it was being built. Now he acts like it was a new
baby or something."

"Does he really?" the prince mused. Elena noticed a gleam in his eye,
and wondered what he was thinking.

She forgot about the gleam when they got back down to the village. Her
mother was talking to Gram Consuela and Grappa Diego near the gate. From
the sour looks on their faces, Elena guessed the subject was the guards
that Kulbinder wanted to put on the fortress walls.

Elena only had time to say, "Uh oh," before her mother started to scold
her for not finishing her knitting. She felt her face go red again, and
couldn't stop herself from glancing over to see if the prince was
watching. He was, she saw sourly, and he seemed to be enjoying it.

When her mother paused for an exasperated breath, the prince cleared his
throat. "Excuse me, reeve," he said, "But some of the children were
telling me that there have been some changes to the village recently?"

"What? Oh, yes, the fishpond and the new footbridge," Yolanda said. "We
finished them last summer."

"And hard work it was too," Grappa Diego added proudly. "But they're as
solid as the walls around us, and I'll wager that they'll last as long."

"I'd enjoy seeing them, if that would be all right," the prince said
politely.

"Why, of course," Grappa Diego replied. "They're just down the other
side of the Quick Tower. If you'd like to…?"

"Thank you, that would be very kind," the prince said.

"Yes, thank you," Yolanda said to Grappa Diego. "I'm sure His Highness
will enjoy it. And I'm sure *you* will enjoy finishing off that scarf,
won't you, Elena?" She turned back to Gram Consuela. "We can finish this
over tea, can't we?" she asked.

Yolanda and Gram Consuela walked off arm-in-arm. Grappa Diego beamed at
the prince and said, "Your Highness? If you'll follow me, we can go
around the old smoking shed and—"

"Actually, I was wondering if it would be possible to see the pond and
the new bridge from the air," the prince asked casually. "They must look
splendid, with the fortress and the mountain behind them. It would be a
shame not to see them at their best."

Grappa Diego hesitated. "I'm sure the sergeant and Kulbinder would join
us," the prince continued smoothly. "But they're probably busy right now
sorting out the men's gear, and making up a schedule for guard duty.
Perhaps we could go up with him again tomorrow?"

"Oh, of course, of course," Grappa Diego replied. "The cloud pens are
this way…"

Ten minutes later Elena was up in the Quick Tower again, sitting on her
make-believe cloud, her knitting lying forgotten in her lap. *It's just
not fair,* she thought. *[**I**]{} have to sit here doing chores, but
[**he**]{} gets to ride a cloud.*

She looked up at the sky. High above, much higher than rain clouds ever
flew, a great gray cirrus had drifted across the sun. Elena tried to
imagine what it would be like to ride something like that, something
that could scratch its back on the stars when it had an itch.

Her thoughts wandered. She imagined that she was drifting over the
plains, listening to the rain fall from her cloud, or stepping off it to
collect her fee from a grateful farmer. She had heard stories all her
life about the places cloudherds visited: Leyselle and Seyferte, where
men fought duels over ladies in silk; Apple Bridge on the edge of the
Blight; Ruuda, where everyone got up at dawn to greet the rising sun;
Ossisswe, with its houses made of glass; and even faraway Araña, full of
monks and strange half-mechanical creatures. She wanted to see them all,
but here she was, making a scarf. It just wasn't *fair*.

Sunlight suddenly struck her face. She blinked and shielded her eyes
with her hand. The sun was poking though a hole in the wild gray cirrus
high above her. She held her breath for a moment, turning a thought over
in her mind. She'd have to seed thimbleberries for a month, but she'd
show the prince whose village this was!

## You Will Stay Behind

"Just step onto her," Grappa Diego said. "one foot at a time. There you
go."

The prince held his arms out for balance as the cloud yielded beneath
his feet like a thick pile of moss. "It's slippery," he said a little
breathlessly. Slippery wasn't the right word, but each time he took a
step, he had to give his feet time to settle down to the bottom
of…of whatever it was he was standing on.

"She just needs to get out for a good rain," Grappa Diego replied
good-naturedly. "Now, come forward here with me." He closed his eyes for
a moment and mind-spoke to the cloud. "Hill!" he commanded. A small bump
obediently bulged up to make a seat for them. Grappa Diego sat down with
a contented sigh. After an uncertain moment, so did the prince. It was
more like a hammock than a mattress, he thought—the skin of the cloud
only stretched so far before going taut.

"There's nothing in the world as comfortable as an old cloud," Grappa
Diego sighed. "I come out here sometimes with a pot of tea, just to
sit." He closed his eyes again. "Forward!" he mind-spoke. Slowly at
first, then faster, the old cloud floated out of the cloud pen and rose
into the air.

The prince held his breath as the rock walls of the gorge fell away
behind them. It was like—it was like looking over the edge of a cliff,
but without the cliff. His fingers tried to dig into the soft, yielding
stuff beneath him, but then the cloud found an updraft, and the prince
forgot his fear as the whole valley opened up in front of him. The road
that had brought him to Marandine looped through the trees below like a
muddy brown snake slithering through tall grass. And he could see where
the side of the mountain had given way, hundreds of years ago, and then
been covered by a second, smaller avalanche so recently that only a few
small bushes stood among the sharp gray destruction. Over his shoulder,
the village looked like a child's toy left lying outdoors.

Elena watched them from her seat atop the Quick Tower. *He'll let Pillow
rain on the fish pond first,* she thought, *That way, she won't be
fidgety when he's trying to show off the footbridge.*

Sure enough, Grappa Diego brought the cloud around in a graceful turn
toward the fishpond. Pillow didn't need any more instruction than that.
She drifted to a stop, then started to rain contentedly. As the drops
splitted and splatted on the pond, she lightened from dark gray to
woolly white. Elena could mind-hear the old cow's contentment.

When the cloud was done, Grappa Diego turned her to follow the stream
that drained the fishpond. *I knew it!* Elena thought smugly. The
village had hired two stonemasons and a whole family of carpenters the
previous fall to build a footbridge over the stream, just above the
little pool where the villagers washed their clothes. The whole thing
had been Grappa Diego's idea, and he had left no doubt in anyone's mind
about who was in charge while the building was going on. It lay right
below where Elena was standing, and she could just imagine how he must
feel about showing it off to a prince.

She closed her eyes and mind-listened to Pillow. The trick would be to
wait until Grappa Diego wasn't paying attention…

"…but that would have washed away the first time it flooded," Grappa
said to the prince, pointing. He didn't notice, or didn't care, that his
passenger wasn't paying attention. "So we put in a couple of blocks from
the wall, that's those ripples there, and…"

Elena concentrated. "Thin," she mind-spoke. "Slowly." She pictured a
hole opening up in the cloud.

"Drop!" worried Pillow.

"Game," Elena reassured her. "Splash!"

"Silly," the cloud huffed, but she saw the prince sink slightly, then
some more. He yelped as he suddenly realized what was happening.

"Hold on!" Grappa Diego shouted, reaching for him, but it was too late.
The prince cried out as he fell through the hole in the cloud, right
into the laundry pond.

There was an enormous splash. His head burst above water a moment later.
"Help!" he screamed. "Help me! I can't—" He thrashed his arms as if he
was trying to swim, but something was pulling him down.

Elena went cold. His armor! The prince must still be wearing his armor!
She looked up in horror. "Go for help!" Grappa Diego yelled at her. With
two quick steps he reached the edge of the cloud and jumped. A moment
later he surfaced in the pond, spluttering and shouting, "Boy! Boy!
Where are you?"

"Help me!" the prince tried to shout, but his armor dragged him under
again. He couldn't breathe! For one confused moment he was back on the
banks of Fast Lake, surrounded by shouting soldiers. He had fallen in
the shallows, and every time he tried to stand up a horse knocked him
down, or he slipped on a stone. He couldn't breathe! He couldn't—

"I've got you, lad!" Grappa Diego shouted. "Now stop flailing about, I
can't—there!" The old man wrapped one arm around the prince and began to
backstroke toward the edge of the pond with the other.

Elena didn't notice that her knitting was dragging behind her, caught on
her boot, as she ran for the tower stairs. Her mother found it hours
later just outside their front door, muddied beyond all hope of salvage.
By then, Elena had finally fallen asleep, exhausted by her own tears. "I
will *not* let anyone as irresponsible as you seem to be put other
people's lives in danger," Yolanda had told her daughter in a flat
voice. "You will stay in Marandine this summer. No, I don't care what he
did, or said, or wore, or had for breakfast. It doesn't excuse your
behavior. The clouds will still be there next year. I hope that'll be
enough time for you to prove that you can be trusted." Elena had wailed,
and threatened to run away, and said that she would go and apologize to
the prince yet again. None of it had changed the stony look on Yolanda's
face, or the hurt in her eyes.

There was a gentle knock on the door. Yolanda opened it and stood aside.
"Tea's made," she said to her mother tiredly. "Just a touch of honey,
the way you like it."

They sat down together in the house that Yolanda had grown up in. Gram
Teresa ladled the milky tea into a mismatched pair of mugs and handed
one to her daughter. Yolanda watched it cool without speaking.

"She's not a bad girl," Gram Teresa finally said. "She's just
headstrong, like both of us. And it isn't as though she's the first one
to pull that trick. Even Fernando does it sometimes, to teach them to
their mind on their clouds."

"But he could have drowned," Yolanda replied wearily. "Norman said that
the prince is getting used to the armor's weight—he wore it night and
day on their way up here—but nobody could swim in something like that.
*Emma*, he could have drowned."

Gram Teresa clucked her tongue. "He could have done that two weeks ago.
Or had his head cut off, or been bitten by a glass snake in his crib.
There's always a 'could have', daffodil."

Yolanda sighed. "I suppose. I just—what if Fernando is right? What if
letting them stay here was a mistake?"

Her mother raised her eyebrows. "You're worried that Duke George will
think to come looking for them here?"

"No, no, not that. It just—Norman's men are polite enough, but half the
village hasn't said more than 'yes' or 'no' to me since they arrived."

Gram Teresa was silent for a moment. Then she grinned slyly. "So it's
'Norman', is it? Not 'Sergeant Crimes'? When did that happen?"

"Oh, mother," Yolanda said, exasperated. "Could we please stick to
important things for a moment? He's a very…polite…man, who—"

"Who just happens to be very handsome," Gram Teresa finished for her.

They were both quiet for a moment, and then Yolanda sighed again. "He
reminds me of father, the way he makes the children laugh."

Her mother nodded wistfully. "He was good at that. Do you remember when
you had the blue measles, and he carried you up to the pens on his
shoulders in the middle of the night because he thought the clouds would
be softer for you to sleep on than your crib?"

"And then he came back down and took Fernando and the other children up
too, one at a time," Yolanda finished. She picked a thimbleberry out of
the little bowl in the middle of the table and rolled it between her
fingers. "We all followed him around like ducklings for days after
that."

Teresa smiled again. "Especially Fernando. Ghosts and goblins, but he
worshipped your father. I think that's half of why he wanted you so
much, all those years."

"I know," said Yolanda softly, putting the thimbleberry back. "That's
half of why I said 'no' to him."

"And it was the right thing to say," Gram Teresa told her daughter
firmly, as she had so many times before. "The stars alone know why, but
he and Charella are bread and butter with each other. If you'd settled
down with him, he'd still be trying to live up to your father. Anyway,
how did we get to talking about Fernando?" She stretched out her legs
and sighed. "It's Elena we should be worrying about."

Yolanda nodded. "I think she really misses having friends her own age."

"She has lots of friends," Gram Teresa protested. "Why, the other
children can't pick up a pinecone without asking her what to do with
it."

"That's not the same. She's always organizing their games and birthday
parties, but that's not the same as having someone special to talk to.
Do you remember how Lanita and I used to share secrets all the time?
She's not like that with Serita, not really."

"I imagine the prince hasn't ever had someone like that either," Gram
Teresa said shrewdly. "Perhaps it's no wonder they're having such
trouble getting along—the only way either of them knows how to have fun
is to boss everybody else about." She paused for a moment, and then
smiled. "Rather like I was, at her age. And look at what a good life
I've had."

## Everything Is Wrong

Nobody seemed to want to speak to Elena the next morning. She sat on a
stool outside her front door, slicing leeks into thin rings, picking
pine needles out of spider webs, and sewing the buttons back onto her
mother's best shirt. Occasionally one of the village's other children
changed direction to avoid passing by her. The ones who didn't mumbled
or smiled insincerely when she said hello.

She ate cold egg stew for lunch, then grabbed her chalk box and slate
and hurried to the other side of the village. A pair of soldiers were
walking side by side along the top of the old fortress walls. Another
pair stood near the main gate. They nodded as she went past, apparently
unafraid of catching whatever invisible disease everyone else thought
she had.

Serita jumped when she opened her front door and found Elena standing
there. "Ready for school?" Elena asked brightly.

"Um, sure," Serita said, a little bewildered to have Elena waiting on
her instead of the other way around.

Neither girl had much to say as they walked to the village's one-room
schoolhouse. When they got there, Martino seemed just as lost for words.
He smiled and said hello, but then started doodling on his slate with a
concentration he had never given schoolwork before. On a normal day,
Elena would have teased him about the dark hairs scattered on his upper
lip that he proudly called a moustache. Instead, she bent her head and
doodled on her own slate as well, afraid of something she couldn't put a
name to.

"I don't think I've ever heard you all be so quiet," Gram Teresa
commented when she arrived a few minutes later. She passed out small
bags of wooden coins so that they could practice making change, then
cleared her throat. "Now, before we start, the reeve has asked me to
make an announcement. From now on, some of the prince's soldiers will be
standing by the gate at all times. You can just ignore them, and come
and go as you please. They won't get in your way. They're just there in
case anyone wants to speak to the prince."

Serita put up her hand. "Will they be there at night, too?" she asked.

"Sometimes," Gram Teresa nodded, "But I expect the tiger will be too. It
hasn't been part of your lessons, but tigers are nocturnal."

"What does 'nocturnal' mean?" Martino asked.

"It means he only eats people at night," Elena muttered under her
breath.

Gram Teresa frowned. "Well, let's get on with the lesson, shall we?"

Elena made and unmade little stacks of make-believe coins on her desk
for the next half hour. She heard Serita and Martino whispering, and saw
him write a note on his slate to show her. She didn't wait to walk home
with them after class.

Things weren't any better the next day, or the day after that. The other
children fell silent when Elena was near them, or, even worse, waited
until her back was turned and whispered to one another until her ears
felt like they were burning. Her only satisfaction was that the prince
didn't seem to be enjoying himself either. Kulbinder had flown into a
mighty rage once it was clear that the prince had not been hurt by his
unplanned swim. He was no longer allowed to play with the village
children, and was shadowed by a soldier wherever he went. There were no
more juggling lessons.

Three days turned into four, then five. On the morning of the sixth day,
the village woke to find that the buds on the snowberry bushes had
opened. Elena's heart sank. The pink, bell-shaped flowers were the
signal for the start of the spring roundup. Everyone suddenly busied
themselves finishing off that extra pair of socks, or replacing one more
buckle on their climbing harness. Elena carried box after box of dried
apples and goat jerky from the cold cellar under Grappa Diego's house to
the trading hall. The grownups—Martino and Serita among them—sorted and
packed well into the night.

The soldiers worked as hard as anyone else. One of them had been a
cobbler's apprentice before taking the king's colors; another had a
talent for fitting big things into small packs. Sergeant Crimes worked
beside them, and could soon untangle spider web nets as well as any of
the villagers. After a couple of days of that, even Fernando stopped
scowling at the soldiers patrolling the walls. No-one, not even Serita,
mentioned that Elena wouldn't be going.

Everyone turned in earlier the night before they were due to leave.
Yolanda fried onions and mushrooms in the last of their butter for
dinner, but even that didn't make Elena feel better. As she tossed and
turned in bed that night, she still hoped that her mother would announce
that she had changed her mind.

But when dawn came, everyone who was going had gone. The only people
left behind were the grams and grappas who were too old for the cold
mountain nights, and the children who were too small. *And me, and my
mother, and Fernando, and **[them]{},*** Elena thought bitterly, her
resentment of the prince and his soldiers renewed.

Everyone had been shocked when Fernando announced that he was staying
behind. "What!?" Yolanda exclaimed. "But—"

"The baby's still cries too much," Fernando said, putting his arm around
his wife's shoulders. Beside him, his wife cooed at their six-month-old
daughter, carefully avoiding Yolanda's eyes.

"I'm sure Charella can look after the baby," Yolanda said helplessly.
"She's not the first—"

"I'm just worried, that's all," Fernando interrupted curtly. He looked
up at the two soldiers walking sentry on top of the wall. "I'm just
worried."

Elena attacked the weeds in the little vegetable garden behind her
house, hacking them with the hoe and throwing them into the wheelbarrow
so hard they thumped. When Little Diego came and asked her if she wanted
to play snakes and whistles, she barked, "No! And don't ask me again!"
He screwed up his face as if he was going to cry, but then stuck out his
tongue at her instead and ran away.

Suddenly she just couldn't take it any more. She dropped the hoe and ran
the opposite way, out of the village and up into the early morning fog,
past the cloud pen to the long ridge where children tobogganed in the
winter. She had secretly hoped that at least one of the other children
would say that if Elena couldn't go, they wouldn't either, but none of
them had.

She stopped at the top of the ridge, panting. "I *hate* you," she
whispered through her tears. She didn't know if she was talking to
herself, her mother, the prince, the other children, or the hermit
thrush that was singing the same three notes over and over again in the
red fir tree behind her. She didn't know, and she didn't care.

She went to her grandmother's for dinner that evening. Watching Elena
stab her potatoes with her fork, Gram Teresa asked what was wrong.

"Everything!" Elena said. "Everyone but me gets to go up into the
mountains, and I'm stuck here with Prince Nosewax like a little kid!"

"Don't use language like that at the table," her grandmother said
reprovingly.

"But it's just not fair! They all think he's the most wonderful thing
that's even happened, just because he has a sword and knows how to do
stupid tricks with socks and washes his hair every day!"

"I wouldn't fret about that apple slicer of his if I were you," Gram
Teresa said. "Or his hair. Remember, the brighter the bird, the poorer
the song."

Elena frowned. "Is that really true?"

Gram Teresa smiled. "No, but neither is a lot of what grownups tell
children. Now, do you want some more? Elena? Elena! You come right back
and—" Her granddaughter slammed the front door behind her with a bang.

Elena might have felt differently if she had been a spider on the wall
of the guesthouse that evening. Kulbinder lay in front of the fire,
combing his fur with his tongue. The prince sat at the dinner table with
a geography primer borrowed from Gram Teresa, its pages brown with age
and use. "What's the point of studying this?" the prince had asked when
Sergeant Crimes dropped it in his lap. "It doesn't even have the borders
right."

"Well, then, it will double as your history lesson," the sergeant had
replied.

Prince Evan sighed and rubbed his eyes. "Have you had enough, Your
Highness?" Kulbinder asked.

The prince nodded and yawned. "Yes, thank you." He closed the book and
pushed it out of the way, then folded his arms on the table and lay his
head on them. "If I had made the world, I would have made less
geography."

A few moments passed. Kulbinder suddenly stopped grooming himself and
raised his head. The prince's eyes were squeezed tightly shut, and his
shoulders were shaking slightly. The tiger rose to his feet and padded
silently across the room to put his head in the prince's lap. The prince
put one arm around Kulbinder's neck and squeezed the tiger tight.
"Hrrrrmmmm…" the tiger rumbled softly.

The prince sat up and wiped his eyes angrily. "I just—I thought some of
them might be my friends," he blurted.

The tiger rumbled deep in his throat once again. "Commoners have
friends, Your Highness. Princes—"

"—have subjects," the prince finished wearily. He took his arm from
around the tiger's neck and reopened his book. After a moment, the tiger
padded back to his place by the fire.

## Underground

Daylight woke Elena the next morning. She yawned and pulled aside the
curtain that separated her bed from the rest of the house. Her mother
was already at the table with a pot of tea, the village's account book
in front of her, chewing on the end of a pencil. She glanced up at her
daughter and smiled. "Morning, daffodil. How did you sleep?"

"All right." Elena yawned again. She sat down opposite her mother and
looked at the heavy ledger books. "What are you doing?"

Yolanda sighed. "Trying to figure out how we're going to feed Norman's
soldiers. They eat like bears! There's hardly a bag of beans or rind of
cheese left in the cellars."

"Why don't you just tell them to go home?" Elena asked grumpily.
"Especially the prince."

Yolanda frowned. "You've hardly been any better, you know." She looked
down at the ledger again and sighed. "I'm sorry, Elena, but I'm going to
be as busy as a spider today. Could you go over to Gram Teresa's for a
couple of hours?"

"Gram Consuela asked me to help her weed her garden today," Elena
replied as she got up to fill a bowl with porridge from the pot on the
stove. "She says her back is bothering her again."

"All right, but I still want you to go over to your gram's when you're
done and catch up on your spelling lessons."

Elena rolled her eyes but didn't say anything. She ate her porridge so
quickly that the first few spoonfuls burned the roof of her mouth, then
got dressed and brushed her hair.

The sky was dull gray. Only a slightly brighter patch showed where the
morning sun was hiding. Elena didn't see any reason to hurry, so she
walked the long way around past the tubs where the village men did
everyone's laundry each week. She answered the grappas' "good mornings"
with a bored "good morning" of her own. Then she told two little girls
that they weren't beating the dust out of a rug properly. Finally, she
turned up the little alley toward Gram Consuela's.

And stopped. And ducked back around the corner. And crouched down. And
slowly peeked around the corner just in time to see Prince Evan turn the
corner at the other end of the alley. She waited a moment for Kulbinder
to appear, but the tiger seemed to be nowhere in sight.

"Maybe he's running away," Elena thought hopefully. "Maybe they're *all*
running away!" But no—some soldiers had been helping with the laundry.
Whatever the prince was doing, he was doing on his own.

Elena sprinted down the alley to the corner. The prince had vanished.
She bit her lip. Had he gone into someone's house? But whose? And why?
Or had he gone all the way down the alley to…

"The tunnels!" she gasped out loud. He must have gone into the old
tunnels underneath the fortress.

Even though she had sneaked into the tunnels herself on dares, Elena
felt a chill. Everyone knew the stories about children who had become
lost underground. Serita swore that she sometimes heard their ghosts
crying for help.

Elena scowled. If Prince Evan had gone underground, she was going to
find out why.

An old wooden grill covered the entrance the prince had used. Blackberry
brambles had sprouted in front of the grill, hiding the hole that time,
the weather, and children's hands had made in it. They scratched the
back of Elena's neck as she squeezed between them and the wall, her face
pressed against the cold stones.

It took her eyes a moment to adjust to the faint light filtering in from
behind her. Behind the brambles, the tunnel was half against as high as
she was tall. Thick wooden beams, shiny-smooth with age, were spaced
every ten strides along the walls. Here and there she saw gaps marked by
upside-down holes in the ceiling where they had given way over the
centuries. She hesitated—she didn't have so much as a match, much less a
lantern—but then realized the shadows on the walls were shifting and
bouncing. She might not have light, but the prince did.

She crept forward as quietly as the tunnel dipped, levelled off, split,
and split again. She and Martino had been here last summer, partly
because it was forbidden, and partly because Martino had said that he
wanted to get away from Serita for a few minutes. She had let him kiss
her (not quite for the first time) and had been furious the next day
when Serita had told her that he'd kissed *her* there too the day
before.

She pushed the memory away. The light on the wall had stopped
dancing—the prince must have stopped moving up ahead. She edged forward
again past another branch in the tunnel, placing each foot carefully
before putting her weight on it. Another step, another, past another
branch in the tunnel…

Holding her breath, she peeked around the corner. She had just a
heartbeat to take in the lantern sitting by itself on the floor before a
stern voice snapped, "Halt!" behind her.

Elena jumped and whirled around. Prince Evan was standing in the
intersection with his sword in his hand and a scowl on his face.

"What are you doing here?" he demanded accusingly. "Why were you trying
to sneak up on me?"

"Sneak up on you?!" Elena replied angrily. "You're the one who snuck up
on *me*!"

"Only because you were sneaking up first," the prince shot back. He slid
his sword into its scabbard. "I thought you were an assassin or
something. A real assassin, not just a fibbed-up one," he added meanly.

"And I thought you were trying to run away, or maybe even something
worse." Elena put her hands on her hips and tried to match the prince's
glare. "Anyway, you shouldn't be down here. It's dangerous for little
boys to go wandering around."

"No more dangerous than it is for little girls that nobody wants to take
with them when they go cloudherding!"

Elena gasped in outrage. "Oh! You— you're— you have worse manners than a
troll!"

"I have *excellent* manners!" the prince replied stiffly. "All my
teachers say so. And anyway, they're better than yours. *You* have worse
manners than a camel!" The prince kicked the wooden post nearest him.
"You all do!"

Elena was so angry that she was almost in tears. "*I'm* awful? You're
the one who's awful! Nobody wants you here! You should have just kept
going yesterday when you ran away and gone home and been king! And quit
kicking that, it isn't yours!" Elena took two quick steps over to the
beam and kicked it herself. "It belongs to the village, and we're the
only ones who are allowed to kick things around here!"

"I'll kick it if I want to!" shouted the prince. He kicked the post
again and again.

Suddenly there was a rumbling sound, then a *screech!* like a thousand
fingernails being dragged down a blackboard. The beam above their heads
shifted slightly, groaning under the weight of the mountain. The two
children looked at each other in horror. The tunnel was caving in!

Elena turned to run back toward the entrance. "Look out!" the prince
shouted. He leaped forward and pushed her out of the way. A block of
stone that would have struck her head hit his shoulder instead. He
grabbed her arm and yanked her forward as the beam creaked again and
gave way. A waterfall of sharp-edged rocks and dust crashed down.

"Run!" he shouted.

"But that's the wrong way!" Elena cried.

"Not any more it isn't!" The prince snatched up his lantern. "Come on!"

They stumbled away from the cave-in. Dust billowed up, choking them. A
stray rock bounced past Elena's head.

The cave-in stopped as suddenly as it began. A last handful of pebbles
rattled past them. Elena and the prince doubled over to cough, their
hearts pounding.

Elena straightened up and gasped. "Your shirt!" she said. The prince's
yellow silk shirt had torn where the stone struck his shoulder.

The prince looked at it ruefully. "I guess I won't be wearing this
around the castle any more."

"I've never worn anything around a castle," Elena replied shakily. "I
mean—" She put her hand over her mouth to stop herself from giggling, or
maybe crying.

"I'm sorry I kicked it," Prince Evan said a few moments later. "I didn't
think it would cave in."

"I'm sorry I kicked it too. Do you think we're trapped?"

"There has to be another way out," replied the prince. "Doesn't there?"

"I don't know," Elena admitted. "I've never come in this far. What were
you doing down here anyway?"

The prince shrugged. "I just wanted to get away from everyone. Kulbinder
and Sergeant Crimes had an argument about—about a lot of things,
and… I just wish I could go home. I know that's what everybody else
would like, too."

"It's not 'everybody'," Elena said awkwardly. "It's just… People
just think you're stuck up. Sometimes."

"I wish you'd tell that to Kulbinder," the prince said bitterly. "He
doesn't think I'm stuck up enough. He keeps saying a prince has to think
they're better than everyone else, just like cats. And not have
friends—he thinks friends are what monkeys and trolls have to pick lice
out of their fur."

The bitterness in his voice made Elena blink. She hadn't thought—

"Anyway, look." The prince held up his lantern and pointed. The spot
they had been standing just a few minutes before was now a jumble of
fallen roof timber and sharp-edged stones.

"We might be able to squeeze through," Elena said tentatively.

The prince shook his head. "What if we got stuck? Or if we bumped
something and it caved in again? I think we should try to find another
way out." He hesitated. "That is, unless you really want to try. I'm not
afraid."

Elena took a deep breath and let it out slowly, just like her mother did
whenever she had a hard decision to make. "No, I think you're right. We
should try to find another way out. Anyway, if we can't, we can always
come back here and try it then."

The tunnel ran level for a hundred paces, then started to dip down. It
became steeper and steeper until finally it turned into a rough-cut
staircase. "I think we're getting further from the village, not closer,"
Elena said in despair. "Maybe we should turn back."

"Not yet," said the prince. "We haven't actually come very far, and we
can't have gotten lost because there aren't any turns. Maybe it'll level
off again soon."

But the steps ran straight down instead into a dark, still pool of
water. There was just enough light for the children to see another set
of steps rising from its far side. The only sound was the *ploop, ploop*
of condensation dripping off the ceiling.

Elena shivered. "I wonder how deep it is?" she whispered.

"*I* wonder what's in it," the prince whispered back. "There are some
horrible things in the castle moat. My grandfather had them brought in
specially by one of his magicians. They're all teeth and tentacles and—"

"Shh!" hissed Elena. "I don't want to know!" She shook her head. "Well
just have to swim. It's not very—oh, wait. I forgot that you don't know
how."

"I know how," the prince replied shortly. "I just can't when I've got
all my armor on. It's kind of heavy, you know."

Elena smiled uncertainly. "Well, it looks like I'm going to get you wet
again." She swallowed. "I'm sorry about that. About the fish pond, I
mean."

The prince didn't reply. He stared at the dark, still water. Suddenly he
snapped his fingers. "I know!" He unbuckled his sword belt, pulled his
sword out of its scabbard, handed the belt to Elena, then knelt on the
last step and pushed the scabbard into the water. A moment later he
turned around with a sheepish look on his face. "It's only about a
handspan deep. It won't even come over the tops of our boots."

They sloshed through the pool to the other set of steps. As they started
up them, Elena thought she could still hear something slosh a little
longer in the water behind them. *It's just your imagination,* she told
herself firmly, but she shuddered slightly from the chill just the same.

The steps grew shallower and shallower until they melted away into the
floor of a tunnel. The tunnel itself slowly became less steep, until
Prince Evan stopped and sniffed the air. "There's a breeze!" he said.
"Come on!"

They raced through the tunnel, around one corner and then another, and
there it was: daylight. Another blackberry bush was blocking the tunnel
entrance. On its other side Elena could see Gram Consuela's vegetable
garden.

They stared at it, breathing hard. "How long do you think we've been
away?" asked Evan.

"I don't know," said Elena. "It feels like ages. Do you think anyone
will have noticed?"

Evan shivered. "We'd have heard Kulbinder roaring if they had. He'll eat
my ears if he finds out I've been down here. Do you think we could just
forget to tell anyone?"

Elena almost laughed with relief. "I think my mother would put my ears
in the stew pot so that *everyone* could eat them if she found out where
we've been. Sure, let's, um, just forget." They shook hands solemnly.

The prince looked at the brambles. "I bet they're going to scratch," he
sighed. Elena rolled her eyes at him.

## Midsummer

The snowberries might have bloomed first, but the arbutus and pale
yellow wood anemones were not far behind. Branches everywhere pushed out
fresh green sprigs, drawing fan-tailed deer up from the valley to graze
outside the fortress walls. The villagers swapped their heavy winter
coats for brightly-colored ponchos. The soldiers busied themselves in a
dozen different ways, polishing their armor, rebuilding the waist-high
walls around the villagers' vegetable patches, or helping Grappa Diego
with his latest project, a six-seat latrine with a built-in charcoal
heater.

Through it all, Elena remained miserable. Every spider web she tried to
pick apart tangled itself into knots. Every goat she milked tried to
kick her, and the steel sewing needle Gram Teresa had lent her kept
biting her thumb like a little steel mosquito. Feeding the fish wasn't
fun, bossing the smaller children around wasn't fun—even riding Old Blue
wasn't fun any more, not when she thought about the clouds that Martino
and Serita would soon be on. *He's just a fat, lazy old puff of fluff,*
she told herself sullenly. No matter how firmly she mind-spoke to him,
he just wouldn't go as fast or as high as she dreamed. And Pillow was
even worse—she just wanted to snuffle around the shadowy side of the
mountain for leftover crusts of snow.

The smile that was never off her mother's face for long only made Elena
feel worse. The day after the cave-in, she had taken Sergeant Crimes up
on Pillow to see Marandine from the air. Gram Teresa woke up before dawn
to bake some apple cookies for them to eat while they were flying, just
as if it was someone's birthday. Elena chipped her grandmother's
favorite teacup while setting the table for dinner that night, and then
was sent to bed early for saying it was an ugly old thing anyway.

"Ugly it might be," Gram Teresa replied testily, "But at least it
doesn't honk at me like an angry goose."

The orange-yellow sun of spring slowly took on the greenish hue of
summer. Baby rabbits crept out from burrows to marvel at how big and how
dangerous the world was. Eggs hatched in a thousand nests; demands for
food were replaced with the flutter of newly-fledged wings. Fernando
spotted a troll's leavings on a trail above the village, and for two
days all the children had to stay inside the walls while he and a
handful of older men tracked it. Grappa Diego didn't join them, not
after yet another shouting match with his son about whether the soldiers
should join the hunt.

When the men returned empty-handed, Yolanda announced that it was time
to re-hang the net that hung over cloud pen. The grownups (*But not me*,
Elena thought dismally) spent most of a day putting spider-web harnesses
on Old Blue and Pillow. Instead of helping, Yolanda stood by and
explained each step to Norman, the prince, and Kulbinder.

When the harnesses were finally cinched tight, Gram Teresa took her seat
on Pillow. Despite scowls from Fernando, Grappa Diego climbed onto Old
Blue. "You'll have plenty more chances to do this," he said smugly. "I
want to enjoy mine while I can."

The two clouds rose slowly into the air, narrowing themselves to give
the morning breeze less to grasp. Cords weighted down by felt-covered
hooks hung from their harnesses. Children and adults together hurried
back to the square to pick up the newly-made net that lay spread across
the stones.

"Front!" Fernando shouted. "A little more front! Now off to
starboard—no, not you, Gram, you're good! You're good! Down a little
more! Got it!" The hooks caught on the net. The two clouds rose gently
until it hung down beneath them, rippling and sparkling in the afternoon
sun.

Gram Teresa and Grappa Diego maneuvered their clouds over the cloud pen
and slowly descended. A dozen waiting arms grabbed the net's edges as
soon as it was within reach. They held it steady while the clouds
floated toward the other side. As soon as the anchor strings were tied,
Gram Teresa and Grappa Diego released their hooks. The net made a sound
like snow sliding off a rooftop as it fell into place. A few of the
watching soldiers clapped.

"Perfect!" Yolanda exclaimed. "Well done everybody. Now, get a good
night's sleep—I'll see you all tomorrow morning."

Daylight streaming through the shutters woke Elena. She heard voices in
the square—voices, then a harmonica. Her eyes widened. It was midsummer!
And if it was midsummer—she threw off her quilt, pulled on her clothes,
and took the stairs three at a time.

"Elena!" her mother called as she pelted out the door. "Oh Elena, brush
your hair! He's not going anywhere!" But she was already gone.

Children and grownups were gathering in a semi-circle around the
speaker's stump in the village square. The harmonica player sat on the
stump with his legs dangling over its side. His stringy gray hair and
wrinkles said he was old, but his eyes twinkled like a child's as he
tapped his toes in mid-air in time to the music.

Little Diego was hopping up and down with excitement. "It's Eduardo!" he
whispered loudly to Elena.

"I know, silly," she whispered back. She tousled the little boy's hair.
As she did so, she felt her mother's arm go around her shoulder. She
slipped her own arm around her mother's waist and smiled up at her.

Her smile froze as she caught sight of Prince Evan was walking toward
them, as neat as a pin, with Kulbinder and Norman beside him. Then she
blinked. Had the prince actually *winked* at her?

"Good morning, Your Highness," Yolanda said politely.

"Good morning, Reeve," the prince replied. "This is quite a turnout for
a minstrel. He must sing like a bluebird."

Yolanda laughed. "Oh, he does more than sing."

"Eduardo is a magician!" Little Diego said excitedly. "He can breathe
fire, and, and *everything*!"

"Ah." Sergeant Crimes looked down at Kulbinder. "That explains why the
sentries didn't spot him."

"But not how we're going to stop him telling anyone we are here," the
tiger muttered.

"Oh, but there's no need to stop me." Kulbinder whipped around with a
snarl. Eduardo was standing right behind them, while the harmonica he'd
put on the speaker's stump played itself behind him. "The reeve told me
it was a secret, and I can't tell other people's secrets, not ever."

He spread his arms wide. "Why, I can't even tell the birds!" A
black-and-gray junco shot out of the air and landed on his shoulder, and
then another, and another, until dozens of tiny birds completely covered
his head and arms. Elena gasped, even though she had seen him do the
spell before. A little girl suddenly laughed and ran at the magician,
waving her arms. The birds burst into the air in a great warbling flock.

And so Marandine's midsummer holiday began. On the steps of the trading
hall, Grappa Diego taught a soldier how to play *The Dancing Goat* on
his fiddle. A dozen strides away, Gram Consuela shooed two soldiers
along as they wrestled her big cooking pot out her front door. People
hung strings of brightly-colored flags on poles, touched up the paint on
toy ducks, played catch-my-finger with laughing three-year-olds, or, in
the prince's case, peeled carrots and nodded as Gram Teresa told him
about the time she had been blown so far off course that she'd scared
some Uwsian farmers half to death.

As soon as the flags were flying, the games began. The grownups ran
three-legged races around the square and through the lane behind Gram
Teresa's. Fernando and Grappa Diego won, as they always did. Yolanda
laughed at their bickering as they untied their ankles. "It's the only
time in the whole year they can bring themselves to do anything
together," she explained to Norman. He had somehow found a big mug of
tea and was watching the whole thing with a grin. "But they'd each
rather tie themselves to a troll than not win a race."

Next, the children played Rain. Yolanda and Gram Teresa split them into
teams of four, and gave each team a teacup. The teams lined up on one
side of the square by the goats' watering trough. Buckets were set on
the other side of the square opposite each team. All together, the
villagers chanted, "Rain, snow, blow, go!" and the race began.

Elena was first for her team. She scooped a teacup of water out of the
trough and walked as quickly and as carefully as she could across the
square to her bucket. The water sloshed over the side of the cup a bit,
but she kept her arm loose instead of trying to hold it stiff, and only
lost a spoonful. As soon as she had dumped the water in the bucket she
ran back to her team as quickly as she could and handed the cup to the
next child in line.

As she went to the back of her team's line for another turn she saw Evan
standing with Kulbinder on the edge of the square. The tiger was shaking
his head "no". The prince kicked a stone, disappointment written on his
face. For a moment—just a moment—Elena felt sorry for him, but then it
was her turn to go again.

The highlight of the morning was the duck race. Everyone in the village,
young or old, had one under their pillow, or wrapped in wool and tucked
safely away in a scented cedar box. Some still wore their first coat of
paint, while others had been handed down almost as long as the villagers
had been herding clouds. Elena's was carved out of hickory, and painted
brown and green like a real duck. It had been her grandfather's; every
year, on the anniversary of his death, she and Gram Teresa carefully
repainted its eyes so that it could see where it was going.

The children were standing by the side of the stream, waiting to drop
their ducks in the water, when Fernando suddenly said, "Oh, now what's
he up to?" Prince Evan was walking toward the crowd with a duck of his
own in his hands. It was brand new, the paint spotless and bright.

"May I?" the prince asked Yolanda politely.

"Of course," the reeve replied warmly.

"Thank you," said Evan politely. "And if I may, could you please ask the
children to come forward? My men have something to give them." He turned
to Norman and nodded. The sergeant sighed and took off his helmet. His
men followed suit. Grinning, each pulled a couple of tall yellow
feathers out of his helmet's crest. Norman gathered them together, then
handed them to the prince, who turned back to Yolanda.

"They aren't duck feathers," he said, "But they're still feathers." He
turned to the children. "Who would like one?"

"Me, me, me!" they shouted. As Evan handed out the feathers, one of his
men produced a spool of thread and began tying them onto the toy ducks.

A few minutes later everyone was lined up once again. "Rain, snow, blow,
go!" the villagers chanted together. In went the ducks! Some children
threw theirs in with a splash, while others placed them in the water
carefully and then gave them a push.

The whole village chased the flock of toys as they raced down the stream
to the fishpond. "Come on, come on, go go go!" Elena called to her duck.
"Oh no, no, look out for the branches! Phew! Now, around the rock—no,
no, around it, don't try to go over it—that's good, now come on, as
quick as you can!" All around her, everyone else was shouting
instructions as well, especially Eduardo, whose battered old duck was
the brightest shade of pink imaginable.

Elena never found out who won, but Prince Evan's was the last one home.
She just happened to be standing next to him as he fished it out. "Looks
like you lost, Your Highness," she said sweetly.

"It depends what you think the game is," he said, grinning, as the
village children came running to ask if they could keep their feathers,
because they were *sure* that was why their duck had gone so fast, and
they were so pretty, and their mothers had said they could, please
please please?

Somehow the morning had flown by, and somehow Norman had managed to
spend most of it standing beside Yolanda. Elena couldn't be angry, not
with the sun floating high above her and everyone talking and laughing.
Try as she might, she couldn't even feel sorry for missing her first
cloudherding.

Her thoughts were interrupted by Grappa Diego's booming voice. "Hello,
hello, hello!" he shouted. He had climbed on top of the speaker's stump
with a big coil of rope over his shoulder. "Hello, hello, hello!" Once
people quieted down he spread his arms wide. "Now, when I was a young
man—" he started. Everyone laughed. All of Grappa Diego's stories
started that way.

"When I was a young man," he continued sternly, "We had another game
that we'd play on days like this. Whenever folk from Porandine or Small
Huervadine or even Big Huervadine came to visit, we'd line them up on
one side of the square, and ourselves on the other, and, well, you know
what we'd do next." He held up a thick coil of rope. The villagers
cheered for no particular reason. Elena cheered too, just because Grappa
Diego had the kind of voice that made you want to.

"Now," said Grappa Diego, twirling the coil of rope back and forth, "We
don't have anyone from Porandine or the Huervadines with us today—"

"What about me?" shouted Charella. A few people whistled.

Grappa Diego smiled. "We don't have anyone with us today who is *still*
from the Huervadines," he corrected, "But we do have Sergeant Crimes and
his men. Sergeant! Come up here!"

Norman almost choked on his tea. He looked at Yolanda pleadingly. She
laughed. "You're on your own."

The soldier handed Yolanda his cup and put his hands on his hips. "I can
hear you from here, thanks!" he hollered. "And I ought to warn you, we
play this game down on the plains all the time. And we're pretty good at
it." The village whistled good-naturedly.

Norman raised his hands to shush them. "In fact," he continued, "We're
so good, we'll stand me and nine of my men against twice their number!"
The villagers cheered.

"You don't need to do us any favors," Fernando yelled over top of them.
"Old men and babies, we'll stand you one for one."

"Speak for yourself!" Grappa Diego yelled back. "This old man is happy
to have the odds run his way for a bit!" Everybody cheered again.

Grappa Diego jumped off the speaker's stump and began tapping people on
the shoulder, sending them to their places. As he did that, Norman
turned to his men and bellowed, "All right, lads, let's see who's gone
soft eating Gram Teresa's sweetcakes!"

Elena grabbed Eduardo's hand impulsively. "Come on, you can pull for
us."

The magician smiled and shook his head, letting her fingers slip away.
"I wish I could. Go on, you pull double for the both of us."

Elena raced away to take her place on the village line.

Eduardo turned to the prince. "How about you, Your Highness? It wouldn't
be fair, Elena on the village side and no one her size on yours."

Kulbinder spoke before the prince. "I think not," he rumbled. "But we
will cheer both sides." Evan suppressed a disappointed sigh.

Five minutes later, Norman stood in the captain's position at the very
back of the soldiers, while Fernando stood at the rear of the villagers.
Both men had passed the rope behind their backs so that they could lean
their whole weight against it. Elena stood at the front of the village
team, holding the rope as tightly as she could. Norman nodded at
Yolanda, smiling. Fernando nodded too, his jaw already set and
straining. Yolanda turned her back to them and faced the rest of the
villagers and led them in the chant. "Rain, snow, blow, go!"

The soldiers all shouted together, "Haw!" and heaved the rope in unison.
The villagers were almost pulled off balance, but then they dug in their
heels and started to scramble. The rope was so taut, it felt like a
piece of wood in Elena's hands. It took her a moment to figure out that
the trick was not to walk, but to *lift*, as if she was trying to pull a
heavy weight up a steep mountain.

The two sides strained at the rope. It quivered from side to side, but
they couldn't budge each other. "Pull!" Fernando bellowed. "Pull!"

Suddenly the soldiers stumbled forward a step. The villagers roared as
they took another step, then another. Elena shouted too, and pulled for
all she was worth. Another step, and another, and then the soldiers had
to scramble across the center line to avoid falling over. Everyone
cheered and laughed, even the soldiers who had lost.

And then it was time for lunch. "Can't make a decent stew in just one
morning," Gram Consuela grumbled as she ladled out serving after
serving. Elena took hers and went and sat with her mother, Norman, the
Prince, and Eduardo. Kulbinder had gone off to patrol the village walls,
sniffing at human foolishness.

"Decent or not, it's very good," Norman said after a couple of
mouthfuls. "If Gram Consuela or Gram Teresa ever want to move down to
the plains, the palace kitchens would be the richer for it."

"Perhaps I should trade some of the men for them," Prince Evan replied.
"Judging from their performance in the tug-of-war, I think I would get
the better side of the deal."

Eduardo stirred what was left in his bowl with his spoon. "Perhaps, Your
Highness," he replied, a small grin quirking one corner of his mouth.
"But perhaps they took a lesson from your duck."

After that, everyone talked about other things. Norman talked about the
games he'd played growing up on the streets of Ensworth, while the
Prince Evan told stories about the tournaments at his father's court, in
which knights duelled with blunted swords, and ladies played long,
intense games of chess. Even Fernando stopped scowling long enough to
listen.

The whole village spent the afternoon mending the net, then gathered
again in the trading hall for dinner. Eduardo kept them all spellbound
with the story of how the Prince of Cats and the wily magician Blue Tam
snuck into Nackles' cave and rescued the children he had enslaved. "Cats
don't have princes," Kulbinder grumbled, but no-one paid him any
attention.

"I want to be a magician when I grow up," Little Diego said wistfully
when Eduardo finished. "I'd make all the spider webs jump into my bag
and wash themselves."

Elena nodded. "I'd make thimbleberries spit out their own seeds. And
people would be born knowing how to read."

"Mmm, those would be powerful spells," Eduardo said thoughtfully. "If
you wanted to make spider webs jump around, you'd have to stand on one
foot for the rest of your life. Making thimbleberries seed
themselves… Hm. The spell wouldn't be difficult, but you would
sneeze every time you saw anything red. And having people know how to
read when they were born—not even the Pilot Angels had magic *that*
powerful."

Little Diego pouted. "Why would I have to stand on one foot?"

"You can't ever get something unless you give something," Eduardo told
him. "Magic can keep you warm on snowy days, but only if you give up
sleeping on anything soft for the rest of your life. That harmonica of
mine?" He scrunched up his face theatrically. "I can't ever pick my nose
again. Oh, go ahead, laugh, but you wait 'til a bug has flown up *yours*
in the middle of the forest and there's no one around to ask for help.
There's always a price. That's the heart of magic."

"And of kingship." Kulbinder was sitting on his haunches near the fire
with his tail curled around his feet. "Being a king is a great and
powerful thing, but it has a price."

Eduardo shook his head. "It's not the same. Kings don't have to pay for
their power, but magicians always do. That's why magicians don't rule
the world."

There was a moment of silence, and then Yolanda sighed. "You must have
seen many strange things."

"I suppose," said the magician, slowly peeling the skin from an apple
with his fingernail. "The strangest…" He looked into the fire, and
everyone leaned just a little closer to hear. "The strangest isn't
something I've seen, but something I've done. Do you play chess?" he
asked Kulbinder.

"Poorly," the tiger admitted. "Sergeant Crimes tried to teach me, but
there are too many 'what ifs' for a cat."

Eduardo nodded. "Did you know that the great forests play chess with
each other? Not the trees—a single tree is like a single ant, or a
single stone in a wall. But the Herd of Trees in the north, and the
jungle of Barra Bantang—the seasons are their heartbeats, and they think
great slow thoughts." He threw the apple peel into the fire to smolder
sweetly. "In every generation, a magician goes and sits among the trees
until he or she knows what move the forest wants to make, then walks the
length of Cherne to let the other forest know."

"Have you done this?"

The magician shook his head. "I hoped to, once. I even learned the spell
for speaking to forests—that's why I can't tell anyone a secret. But it
was the jungle's turn to move, and, well…" He shrugged.

Everyone was quiet for a moment until Grappa Diego cleared his throat.
"What happens if nobody shows up?"

Eduardo smiled crookedly. "The world ends, or so they say."

The silence that followed was broken by the tiger's voice. "I believe
that was the prince's seat."

Elena twisted on her stool. Little Diego was sitting next to the fire,
his eyes still wide. Two strides away, the prince had frozen with a
fresh mug of tea in his hands. "I don't mind—" he started to say, but
the tiger ignored him.

"Young sir? I said, I believe that was the prince's seat."

"But he got up," Little Diego complained.

"There are plenty of other seats," Fernando added. He jerked his chin at
a stool pushed up against the wall. "One right over there."

"But this one was the prince's." Kulbinder rose off his haunches, his
ears starting to fold back.

The prince's hand came down on his neck. "It's all right," Evan said to
Little Diego, whose eyes had gone wide. "I don't mind standing for a
bit."

"Hrrrrmmmm… Your Highness, I think that—"

"I said, it's all right," the prince interrupted. Kulbinder's head
snapped around. For a moment their eyes locked, and then the tiger's
tail unbristled.

"As you wish." He blinked slowly. "Sergeant, I'll take first watch on
the wall." Without waiting for an answer, the big cat flowed out of the
room. Everyone watched him leave, so no one saw the prince's shoulders
slump as the tension left them.

## It's Flying! It's Flying!

Little Diego watched the prince with a frown. "What are you doing?" he
finally asked.

Prince Evan smiled at him. "Magic," he whispered, winking. He was
sitting halfway up the steps that led to the top of the old fortress
wall with a jumble of sticks, cloth, and string in his lap. The morning
sun was warm on his back. Below them, the village was just starting to
wake up from yesterday's holiday.

Little Diego's frown deepened into a scowl. "Are you a magician? Like
Blue Tam?"

"Oh no, not like that. This is the kind of magic that anyone can do."
Using a straight stick as a ruler, Evan chalked a line across a square
of bright yellow silk, then folded the cloth in half and began to cut it
carefully with his knife.

"Why?" asked Little Diego.

"Why what?"

"Why can anyone do it?"

Evan sighed. "Just because," he said in exasperation. "Why do little
kids ask so many questions?"

"Just because," Elena said. Evan twisted around and looked up at her.
She smiled uncertainly. "Hi," he said.

"Hi," she replied. "What are you doing?"

Evan smiled. "Like I told Little Diego, magic." He swept some threads
and splinters of wood off the step to make some room.

Elena hesitated a moment before sitting down beside him. "Is that your
shirt?"

The prince held up the yellow silk. "It was," he said ruefully. "It got
so torn up when we were—you know, *then*, that I knew Kulbinder would
ask questions if he saw it. I thought it would be smarter to get in
trouble for cutting it up than for you-know-what."

Elena nodded. "Good idea. But really, what are you doing?"

"I'm making a kite. See?" Evan held up a cross made from two thin pieces
of wood. "All I have to do now is tie on the sail, and put some ribbons
on a string for a tail."

"What's a *kite*?" asked Elena.

Evan blinked. "What do you mean, what's a kite? No, wait! I'm sorry.
Really. I've just never met anyone who didn't know what a kite was."

"Well, you have now." Elena sat back down. "What is it for?"

"You'll see. Here, hold this." Elena held the silk in both hands while
Evan carefully cut it in half, then in half again. The back of Evan's
shirt became the kite's sail, while its sleeves were turned into ribbons
for the tail. By the time they were done, a dozen children had climbed
the stairs to take a look, grown bored, and wandered away. Only Little
Diego was still there, his knees drawn up under his chin, his eyes
half-closed.

An hour later, Evan finally turned the kite over to check it one last
time. "It's still lopsided, but it'll do. Come on!" He scrambled to his
feet and bounded up the stone steps. Elena and Little Diego scrambled
after him.

"It's a good wind," Evan panted to them when they got to the top. Elena
had never seen him so excited. "See?" He pointed at the wind goose
flapping its wooden wings on its pole in the middle of the village.
"Let's see what she can do. Here, hold this." He handed the kite to
Elena. "No, both hands, here and here."

He pulled two coils of spider thread from his pocket and tied one end of
each around the horizontal strut of the kite. After a quick tug to make
sure the knots were secure, he began to back away from Elena, unwinding
the threads as he went. "Now, when I tell you to, you throw it straight
up into the air," he told her. "And remember to keep the nose pointed
up!

"What's he doing?" asked Little Diego.

"I don't know," Elena said. "I think he's gone crazy."

"Are you ready?" the prince asked.

"I guess," Elena said.

"All right—one, two, three, *now!*" Elena threw the kite into the air as
hard as she could. It hung there for a heartbeat, unsure of itself, and
then—

"It's flying!" shouted Little Diego. "It's flying, it's flying, it's
flying!" Elena watched open-mouthed and Evan laughed with pleasure as
the kite climbed higher and higher, a bright yellow diamond in a clear
blue sky, its tail whipping and snapping behind it.

All of a sudden it turned over and dove straight down. She shrieked and
put her arms up to shield her head. The kite righted itself instantly.
"Don't worry!" shouted Prince Evan, "It's supposed to do that!" The kite
dived and climbed again, then spun a quick figure eight.

"Look, look!" shrieked Little Diego. Elena tore her eyes from the kite.
Fernando was standing at the top of the stairs, scowling. "It's flying!"

"Hmph," Fernando snorted, ignoring Little Diego's tugs on his sleeve.
"What kind of magic is this?"

"It's not magic," said the prince. "It's just a kite."

"Hmph. I'd like to see it rain." He turned and stalked back down the
stairs.

Little Diego ran to the prince. "Let me!" he said, reaching for the
strings. "Please!"

"All right. Here, take this string in one hand—no, no, one in each hand.
That's right. Now just tug on it gently. See how the kite dives down to
that side? Now the other…" By the time Little Diego had the kite
swooping from side to side, all of the other children were there,
clamoring for a turn. Some of their grandparents came as well to marvel
at the sight and smile at the happy laughter. Yolanda and Norman watched
for a while as well, his arm around her shoulders.

Finally Evan looked at Elena. "Don't you want a turn?" he asked.

"Sure," she shrugged

"Here, turn around," said the prince. "Now take this string in your
right hand, and—"

"I know, I know. I've heard you tell everyone else in the village how to
do it." The strings tugged at her hands as the kite danced on the wind.
She pulled one down. Sure enough, the kite dove to that side. She
relaxed her arm. The kite righted itself and began to climb again. She
quickly learned how to make it spin and dive, and brought it down so far
that the strings were almost touching the wall before she made it climb
again.

She was just about to hand it back to Evan when the string in her right
hand went limp. At the same instant the kite turned edge-on and began to
fall toward the ground. "What's wrong?" she cried.

"The string's broken!" As quick as a bee Evan pulled his knife from his
belt and cut through the other string. The kite tumbled end over end for
a moment like a leaf, then steadied and drifted away down the valley.

"Oh no! Oh, I'm sorry." Elena turned to Evan, expecting him to be angry,
but instead he just looked a little bit sad.

"Don't worry," said the prince. "It was just a kite."

Elena could still see the little yellow diamond against the green-black
pines in the valley below. "Why did you cut the string? Maybe we could
have pulled it in."

"It's bad luck. If the kite wants to go free, you always have to let it.
If it comes back to you, then it really is yours."

"I don't think this one is coming back," Elena said doubtfully.

The prince smiled. "Neither do I, unless somebody finds it. That's
supposed to mean good luck instead."

Hours later, and miles away, two soldiers heard a stick crack in the
forest. The only difference between them and the soldiers in Marandine
was that the feathers in their helmets were green instead of yellow, but
that was all the difference in the world.

When they heard the sound, they drew their swords and turned to stand
back to back. "Who goes there?" one of them called.

"Er aye," a voice quavered from behind a pine tree. "It's just me, just
me. I found something as might be yours."

"Show yourself!" the soldier ordered.

A heavy-set man dressed in a mouse-skin jacket and a threadbare kilt
stepped out of the trees. His hair was as tangled as the bushes, and if
he had ever had a bath, it had probably died of fright. "It's just me,
just me," he said again.

"What have you got behind your back?" the soldier asked, stepping
forward. His partner kept his eyes on the trees around them.

"Oh, it's a pretty, a pretty," the heavy-set man said. "Ta da!" With a
flourish, he pulled his prize out and waved it like a fan.

"A kite?" the soldier said scornfully. "What would we want with a kite?"

The heavy-set man's face fell. "Dunno nothing about no whatchamacallit
kites," he muttered. "Just thought it was pretty, might be yours, might
be worth something. Never seen anything like it, I haven't. It came
floating down outta the sky like a bird."

"Well, it's just a kite, you silly old beggar, and we don't—" The
soldier cut himself off abruptly as his partner touched his arm.

"It's not just a kite," the second soldier said softly. "A *yellow*
kite. Bring it here!"

The heavy-set man handed it over hesitantly. The second soldier pulled
off one glove and ran his fingers over the silk. "Feel that," he said to
his partner. "That's royal wear, that is. Where did you find it?"

The heavy-set man shuffled. "Outta the sky, it did," he mumbled, "Just
like a cloud."

"But you saw where it came from, didn't you?" the second soldier
persisted. The heavy-set man nodded and pointed at the mountain peaks
behind him.

"The cloudherds," breathed the second soldier. "His Highness will want
to hear about this! Come on!"

## Trapped!

Elena spent the next three days learning how to make kites, and teaching
the prince how to knit spider webs together to make patches for the
cloud pen net. They even played a game of Snakes and Whistles with the
little children. After the first few minutes, the prince suggested that
he and Elena tie their ankles together, and play as if the game was a
three-legged race. The little children shrieked with laughter each time
he and Elena sent each other sprawling.

Afterward, as they lay on ground panting and giggling, he confided that
he thought Sergeant Crimes had kissed her mother. "After they went
flying yesterday," he said. "Do you mind? I mean, he's under my command,
and if he's doing something he shouldn't…" The prince trailed off.

Elena shrugged. "It doesn't bother me," she lied. "She almost got
married again when I was still little to someone from Small Huervadine,
but then she was made reeve, and was busy all the time."

There was a long pause. "How about you?" Elena asked.

"How about me what?"

"Have you kissed any princesses?"

"Oh, lots," he said. He grinned at Elena's scowl. "That's one of the
good things about everyone knowing that you're going to be king. Lady
Margaret—she's my father's Hand of the Law—even lets me take dancing
lessons with her daughter."

There was another long pause. "How about you?" he asked. "Have you
ever—"

"Kissed a princess? Nope." It was Elena's turn to grin. "But I've beaten
a prince in a footrace."

Evan blinked. "When was that?"

"About two minutes from now," Elena said, leaping to her feet. "Rain
snow blow *go!*"

"Hey, that's not fair!" he shouted, but he chased after her anyway.

The crow arrived the next morning. Elena was combing the knots out of a
goatskin rug when she heard her grandmother's voice through the window.
"Did Diego tell you?" Gram Teresa asked.

"No, Fernando," Gram Consuela replied. "Can't imagine your Yolanda is
too happy." Elena put down her comb to listen.

"Oh, pish tosh," Gram Teresa said dismissively. "She'll be grateful for
some peace and quiet. I can't say I'll miss having that big old cat
prowling around all the time."

"Mm… Seems to me it isn't just the tiger who's been prowling around
of late." Elena could just imagine Gram Consuela arching one eyebrow.
"Do you think she'll go with him?"

"My daughter? Live on the plains? More likely Diego will have to teach
*him* how to wash spider webs."

Elena's mouth went dry. She slipped out the back door of the house as
quietly as she could and peeked around the corner. The two old women
were standing in the lane just around the corner. "Still, I suppose it's
good to know that the king is doing so well," Gram Consuela was saying.
"It must be a great relief for the boy."

Elena didn't wait to hear another word. She sprinted down the lane to
find her mother.

Yolanda was sitting with Norman, Kulbinder, and Prince Evan in the
trading hall. A big black crow stood on the table in front of them,
picking berries out of a bowl and swallowing them whole. Elena rushed up
the stairs, then stopped to catch her breath. Before she could open her
mouth, Yolanda turned to Norman and said, "See? The whole village
knows."

"So much for secrets," the crow squawked. "I doubt His Majesty will be
pleased."

Kulbinder growled deep in his throat. "From what you've told us, His
Majesty has so much to be pleased about that I'm sure he will overlook a
few misplaced secrets." The bird bobbed its head, then snatched another
berry from the bowl.

"I'll have the men start packing immediately," Sergeant Crimes said,
sounding anything but pleased. "I'm sure they'll be sorry to leave—you
have been wonderful hosts."

"I'm sure we'll all be sorry to see you go," she replied. "Elena, could
you please go and ask Grappa Diego to beat the home drum a few times? We
should give everyone a chance to say goodbye."

The village came to a stop as everyone buzzed around, gossiping and
watching the soldiers sort out heir gear and gossiping some more. Some
of the little children cried when they realized that the soldiers
actually weren't going to stay forever.

The going-away lunch Yolanda hastily organized was a subdued affair.
Just six of them sat around the small table in the guesthouse: the
prince, Norman, Kulbinder, Yolanda, Elena, and the crow. Everyone asked
the crow questions while they ate, the tiger in particular. The news he
gave them couldn't have been better. Duke George's army had been beaten
again and again, and King Peter was deep inside Nuthe. "Last word was
that even Colway had finally sent a regiment across the Trout to close
the back door to Nuthe Town," the crow squawked. "That's as good as
seeing vultures circling."

"I would not have believed Nuthe could be beaten so badly, so quickly,"
the tiger rumbled. "Traitor he may be, but he's also a canny soldier."

The crow would have shrugged if he had shoulders. "I don't pretend to
understand war, Sir Tiger. Who wins, who loses, we crows eat well either
way."

The soldiers left an hour later. The whole village turned out to see
them go. Evan wore his uniform, and stood very straight as he clasped
people's hands to thank them. Even Fernando gave him a brief nod and
wished him a safe journey.

When they finally formed up to march away, the village children ran up
onto the walls to watch them go. Elena didn't join them. Instead, she
stood forlornly in the square beside her mother with the prince's
geography book tucked under her arm. "For Elena, in case she ever needs
to find her way," he had written in neat, square letters inside the
cover.

"He'll come and visit," Yolanda said. She hugged her daughter's
shoulders. "I'm sure he will. Or you can visit him, next summer."

"Maybe we could both go," said Elena, putting her arm around her
mother's waist.

Her mother gave her another squeeze, her eyes still on the old fortress
gate.

An hour later Elena heard shouting, and then Kulbinder's huge roar. She
dropped the potato she'd been peeling back into its bucket and ran for
the square.

Norman was standing beside the speaker's stump with the prince,
Kulbinder, and a handful of soldiers. Elena wondered why one soldier was
wearing red ribbons instead of yellow, then realized that the red was
dripping from his sleeve.

"We were ambushed!" Sergeant Crimes panted, doubling over to catch his
breath. "The crow..."

Kulbinder's eyes blazed with fury. "Your Highness! We must flee!"

"They're coming!" Fernando shouted from the gate. "Dozens of them!"
Someone screamed. The villagers scattered for their homes.

Yolanda started to run toward the gate. Norman grabbed her arm. "No," he
gasped. "They'll think you're with us."

"I am," Yolanda said shortly. She kissed the sergeant like a hawk diving
on a rabbit, then pushed him away. "They won't hurt me. You just get him
to safety." She ran toward the gate.

"*Emma*, no!" Elena screamed. Norman grabbed her arm to stop her from
following her mother.

"Slow them down!" he ordered his men. "Elena, we need to hide. Where can
we go?"

"I don't—wait, I know! Come on!" She ran for the south wall with the
prince, the sergeant, and the tiger at her heels.

As they came around the corner of Gram Consuela's house they ran
straight into two soldiers with green feathers in their helmets.
Kulbinder launched himself at the first without breaking stride. The man
shrieked and went down under the tiger's weight. The second snarled,
almost like a tiger himself, and swung his sword at Norman. The sergeant
knocked the blow aside with his own blade and kicked his opponent in the
knee. "Keep going!" he shouted as he swung his sword again.

"Which way?" Kulbinder roared. Elena smelled smoke. People were
screaming. They ran through Gram Consuela's vegetable garden to the
bramble patch that clung to the old fortress wall. She scraped her
shoulder against the wall as she squeezed through the narrow gap between
the brambles and the old stones, then ducked into the tunnel that she
and Evan had been trapped in. She stopped to gulp for air, and was
almost knocked over as first Evan and then Kulbinder bumped into her.

"Sssss…" hissed the tiger. "What is this?"

Elena tried to speak, but all that came out was, "Mu— mu—".

The tiger padded into the tunnel and sniffed the floor. The prince stood
awkwardly for a moment, then put his hand on Elena's shoulder and shook
her gently. "It's all right," he said softly. "You were very brave back
there."

"What—what are they going to do? Where's my mother?" Elena gulped. Her
tears had stopped as suddenly as they had started, but her arms and legs
were trembling. She hugged herself, suddenly feeling cold.

"I don't know," Evan said wretchedly.

Someone shouted nearby. They both froze. Kulbinder was suddenly beside
them, his tail snapping from side to side. "Where does this come out?"
he asked Elena quietly.

"Down…down to some water, and then back up by Gram Teresa's. But
it's blocked now. There was a cave-in."

"Like rabbits in a sack," the tiger snarled softly. "I'll do what I can,
Your Highness, but…"

Evan lowered his hand to the tiger's head and scratched his ears
silently. The brambles rustled again. The tiger tensed his muscles as he
readied himself to pounce. The brambles rustled once more, and—

"Eduardo!" Elena gasped as Kulbinder leaped at the startled magician.
The tiger twisted in mid-flight, but couldn't stop himself from knocking
the magician off his feet. The two fell to the ground with a thump.

Elena and the prince rushed forward to help the magician to his feet as
the tiger rolled off him. "Are you all right?" the prince asked.

"Fine, thanks," Eduardo wheezed. "I'm sorry, should I have knocked?"

"It's not funny!" the tiger snarled. "I might have killed you."

"No, it isn't funny, is it?" the magician replied absent-mindedly,
brushing dirt from his vest. "I've seen four men die today, for nothing
better than the color of the feathers they were wearing. It isn't funny
at all."

"What about Sergeant Crimes?" "What about my mother?" Evan and Elena
asked at the same instant.

"The duke's soldiers have your mother," Eduardo said to Elena. "She's
all right, girl, she's all right."

"And what about Sergeant Crimes?" Prince Evan asked again.

The magician didn't answer for a moment, then let out his breath in a
deep, sad sigh. "I'm sorry," he said. "Your Highness, I'm so sorry."

Evan went completely still. He blinked, then blinked again. His hand
dropped to rub Kulbinder's ears, but the tiger wasn't there. "You—why
didn't you stop them?" he whispered. "Why didn't you—"

"Because I'm just a magician," Eduardo said wearily. "I'm just an old
hill magician, not some war-wizard. I can't make fireballs, or turn
arrows back against bowmen mid-flight. I'm sorry. Truly, I am."

No-one said anything for a long moment. Finally, Kulbinder asked, "How
did you find us?"

Eduardo shrugged. "I traded sight with the crow when I heard the
fighting. He was up in the trees, following you."

"So he'll tell Nuthe's men where we are?"

Eduardo shook his head. "All he'll have seen is the insides of my
eyelids. But they'll still know that you came this way—I could only hold
the spell for a few moments. It won't take them long to find this
tunnel. At least…" He frowned, then bent over and picked up a pebble
that lay on the tunnel floor. He sniffed at it, turned it over in his
hand, and stuck it into a pocket.

"What are you doing?" Elena asked, as he prodded another small stone
with the tip of his finger.

He didn't seem to hear. Instead, he held the rock to his ear, then set
it back down. "Too noisy," he said, as if that explained everything.

"Eduardo?" Elena repeated. "What are you *doing?*"

"Hiding," Eduardo said. "Ah, here we are!" He picked up another stone
and held it out for Elena to see, then fished the others out of his
pocket. "You have to have four," he explained. "Four because it's a
square, two times two, and people's buildings are mostly squarish. Now,
if bees had magicians, they'd probably need six stones to do this, since
honeycombs always have six sides."

He sucked on his front teeth for a moment, then went to the mouth of the
tunnel. From somewhere deep in one of his other pockets he produced a
measuring tape. He muttered to himself as he carefully measured the
width of the opening, then laid the stones down one by one.

He dropped the measuring tape back into his pocket and muttered to
himself. Nothing happened that Elena could see, but Eduardo said,
"Hmph," in a satisfied way and then turned to the other three.

"Don't go across the stones," he ordered. "It'll break if you do."

Elena opened her mouth to ask, "Break what?" but Kulbinder spoke first.
"Does it hide the brambles too, or just the tunnel?"

"Just the tunnel," Eduardo told him. He yawned. "Working with stones
always makes me sleepy. Please someone wake me up when something
happens." He sat down on the tunnel floor with his back against the wall
and closed his eyes.

Elena suddenly gasped. "Your hair! It's all falling out!"

Eduardo opened his eyes tiredly and brushed at his head. A clump of gray
came away in his hand. He looked at it sadly. "Guess I'll be needing a
hat this winter," he yawned again. His eyes fluttered shut. Within
seconds, his deep, gentle breathing showed that he was asleep.

Elena watched him sleep for a second. "I don't understand," she finally
said. "What did he—"

"He's hidden the tunnel," the prince said dully. "Barramarrabee did it
to a whole bridge once for my grandfather. Anyone who looks through the
blackberry bush will just see more wall now."

"We hope," Kulbinder added under his breath. He padded up to the tunnel
mouth and sniffed one of the stones, then turned said over his shoulder,
"I'll take the first watch, Your Highness. Try to get some rest."

They took turns peeking out through the blackberry bush. The village
seemed deserted, except for the soldiers in green-feathered helmets who
marched across the square in twos and fours. Sometimes they were alone,
and sometimes they had one of the villagers between them.

Elena sat on the tunnel floor. She didn't cry. There didn't seem to be
any point. She wondered idly if it meant that she was turning into a
grownup.

It could have been a few minutes or an hour later when Kulbinder hissed,
"Sh! Soldiers!" Elena and the prince scrambled to their feet and crept
up to the tunnel mouth to crouch beside the tiger. A moment later Elena
felt Eduardo's hand on her shoulder as he joined them.

A half a dozen soldiers with green feathers in their helmets were
standing in Gram Consuela's vegetable patch. Grappa Diego stood in their
midst with his hands tied in front of him.

"Quiet," the magician whispered. "Very quiet. And it would probably be a
good idea to move back a bit. No point pushing our luck."

They backed up slowly as the soldiers walked up to the wall and started
running their hands over it. Two soldiers stood with their swords drawn
as a third kicked Gram Consuela's drying rack away from the wall. They
poked at the stones behind it, then moved on. Two other soldiers kicked
apart a broken-down old chicken coop, then lifted the stinking, rotten
canvas that had been its floor to check underneath it.

Finally they came to the blackberry bush. A soldier hacked at it with
his sword, but the old brambles just bent under the blows. The soldier
swore in frustration, then called out, "Sergeant!"

An older man with an enormous moustache and two green ribbons tied
around his arm came over to join him. "Can't get through that," the
solder said, pointing at the bush. "Tough as old rope."

The sergeant looked at the bush thoughtfully, then whistled sharply. His
men pulled Grappa Diego over to him.

"What's behind this?" the sergeant asked.

"Nothing," the old man said. "Nothing I know of, anyway."

"Well," the sergeant said indulgently, as if he was speaking to a child,
"If there's nothing here, we might as well go back and get some tea.
What do you think?"

"I told you, there's no way they could have doubled back," Grappa Diego
said wretchedly. "Please… my son…"

"Mm, yes," the sergeant said absently. "You want us to stitch up that
hole in his side, I want to find a missing prince… Strange how
everything's just a thread in one big web, isn't it?"

Elena's stomach went cold as she realized what the sergeant must mean.
She grabbed Eduardo's sleeve and pulled his head down to hers.

"We have to do something!" she whispered frantically. "We can't just—"

"Shh, child, be quiet," Kulbinder hissed. "There's nothing we can do,
not now."

Hot tears stung Elena's eyes. "But—"

"Ssst!" hissed Kulbinder, his ears flat against his skull. "They mustn't
hear you!"

Elena stared at him for a moment. Suddenly she pushed Eduardo away and
took a deep breath to shout to the soldiers—

—and something that felt like a boulder wrapped in a blanket slammed
into her stomach, knocking the wind out of her. She fell back against
Eduardo, who caught her in her arms. Kulbinder reared up on his hind
legs. His weight pushed Elena and the magician back against the wall.

"You will be *quiet!*" the tiger whispered. Elena felt his hot breath on
her face, and would have screamed if she had any air to do it with.

No-one moved for a moment, then Kulbinder dropped back down onto all
fours with no more sound than a leaf landing on soft grass. Eduardo held
Elena a moment longer before loosening his arms. Elena's whole body was
shaking, but she felt as if it belonged to someone else. She put out a
hand to steady herself against the tunnel wall, then glanced across at
Evan. The prince was still staring at the brambles.

Outside, the sergeant with the big moustache was still staring at the
old wall. His tongue fished for a scrap of his lunch that was caught in
his back teeth. Eventually he gave up and dug it out with his
fingernail, then flicked it on the ground. "I wonder…" he mused
softly, drawing his sword, "I wonder—why is there a gap here between the
bush and the stones?"

Elena watched with mounting horror as the sergeant pulled the bush aside
so that he could squeeze himself between it and the wall. He looked
straight into the tunnel, straight at them, and patted the empty air
with his free hand. He worked his way left, patting every nonexistent
stone from knee height to as high as he could reach, then knelt down and
stared into the empty air just above the ground. He even poked at it a
few times with his sword. Finally, he balled up his hand and struck the
air twice with his fist in frustration, then scraped his way back to his
men.

Eduardo let out a long, silent breath. "I'm glad it worked," he
whispered into Elena's ear. She nodded her head dumbly.

A moment later the soldiers were gone, with Grappa Diego stumbling along
behind them. Kulbinder padded up to the front of the tunnel and sat on
his haunches, his tail curled up beneath him.

The prince sat down opposite Elena with his back against the wall. "You
could save him," she said.

Evan stirred slightly. "No I can't," he said tiredly. "I'm the prince."

"But you could!" Elena insisted. She felt her tears welling up again.
"Or don't stupid villagers like us matter?"

"I didn't start this!" the prince snapped. "It's Duke George's fault! If
he catches me, my father will have to surrender."

"So what?" Elena said bitterly. "What difference would it make if Duke
George was king instead of your father, except that you wouldn't be the
next king?"

"The difference is that my father obeys the law," Evan replied levelly.
"He doesn't just change things to suit himself. Sergeant Crimes
wouldn't—" He blinked, and suddenly had to swallow, but when he
continued his voice was steady. "Sergeant Crimes wouldn't leave a
wounded civilian untended just to get someone to do something."

"But isn't that what you're doing right now?" Elena asked. Her tears
were running down her cheeks and making little tapping noises as they
fell on the tunnel floor. "You could help him just by stepping through
that wall, but you're not going to, are you?"

The prince sat silently, hugging his knees. After a few moments Elena
wiped her face on her sleeve and closed her eyes.

## Jump!

"Elena! Hsst! Girl! Wake up!"

Elena opened her eyes slowly. Why was she sleeping on the floor? And why
had she gone to bed without brushing her teeth? Then she remembered what
had happened, and sat up in a hurry.

"Oh, owww," she moaned. Her back and neck felt as stiff as frozen meat.

"Quiet!" Kulbinder hissed. "Come on, the sun is up. They're moving." He
vanished on silent paws. Elena rubbed her neck and ran her tongue over
furry teeth as she tiptoed after him.

The tiger had joined Evan and Eduardo at the tunnel mouth. Elena
scrunched down beside them and looked out through the brambles.
Everything seemed normal for a moment, but then she saw a dozen little
things were wrong. Smoke wasn't coming out of anyone's chimney. Fernando
and Charella's door was swinging back and forth in the wind, creaking
like an old cart on a mountain road. Most of all, she couldn't see any
people.

"Have they—what have they done with my mother? And Gram Teresa, and
everyone else?" she whispered.

"Shh," Eduardo whispered back. "They're all right. The soldiers made
everyone sleep in the trading hall so they could guard them. Look,
there's the reeve now!"

Elena shifted. "I'm going to sneak up to the hall and see if I can hear
what they're saying."

"No!" said Kulbinder and Eduardo together. The tiger and the old
magician glared at each other. "It's too dangerous," said Eduardo.
"You're sure to be caught."

"And even if you aren't, they'll know where we are." The tiger's ears
were flat against his head. "Look up there on the wind goose."

Elena squinted. The breeze wasn't strong enough to make the goose's
wooden wings flap, but it wobbled from side to side as stray gusts
tugged at it. "I don't see anything," she finally said.

"On its back," Kulbinder growled. "It's the crow. He'll see you before
you take three steps."

"But we have to do something!" Elena whispered urgently.

"We are doing something," said Evan flatly. "We're waiting. That's what
most of being a soldier is about."

Elena had almost forgotten that he was there. "I'm sorry… I'm sorry
about what happened to Sergeant Crimes," she said awkwardly. "And about
what I said. I—"

"Thank you, but I'd rather not discuss it." He was sitting in exactly
the same spot he'd been in the night before, with his knees drawn up
under his chin and his arms wrapped around his legs, staring at the
opposite wall.

Eduardo put his arm around Elena and hugged her. "Shh," the magician
whispered. "He'll be all right."

"It's just…" Elena started. She stopped, not knowing how to finish
her sentence.

"It's just a lot of fuss over the color of some feathers," Eduardo
agreed. "Speaking of which…" He fished a couple of owl feathers out
of a pocket in his coat. "They hear better than anything except bats,"
he explained before blowing on them. Instantly, every footstep and
breath in the square seemed to echo in the tunnel.

"—tie you between two of my men," the sergeant was saying. "But you know
these hills, and we don't. Even with shackles, I'm pretty sure we'd turn
around and find ourselves with nothing but thin air. So instead, I'm
just going to remind you mind that you have children here, and wounded.
The sooner we're back, the sooner you can tend to them."

"No decent man would hurt a child to get someone to do what he wanted!"
Elena could almost hear her mother's eyes blazing.

The sergeant snorted. "The sooner we find the prince, the sooner we'll
be on our way, and we can all go back to being just as decent as
anything."

"Just as…?" Yolanda almost choked. "He almost died! *Damn* you, and
your duke with you!"

The sergeant's hand clenched into a fist. Yolanda straightened up and
looked him straight in the eye. It seemed like the whole world held its
breath for a moment, but then the sergeant smiled. "Ah, I see. He's your
man, then, the one we stitched up?"

"They're *all* my men," Yolanda hissed. "As long as I'm their reeve,
they're all my men, and my women, and *especially* my children."

The sergeant nodded slightly, as if he had finally heard something that
he understood. "Fair enough. You lot!" Three soldiers snapped to
attention. "Left, rear, and right. Keep your eyes peeled for the prince
while we're up there, and for Fortune's sake, hold onto something."

The spell faded. "So…" Eduardo mused, "One cloud will be away,
looking for us. That just leaves your crow."

"He's not my crow," the tiger rumbled, "Though he might be my breakfast
one day. But there's a troop of soldiers out there too, remember. If
we're going to do this, we'll need something to distract them both."

"Do what?" asked Elena.

"Escape," said Eduardo. "We can't stay here forever." He sighed and
rubbed his eyes. "I told her. If you play with kings, sooner or later
you find yourself playing their game, by their rules. That's what being
a king is really about: choosing the game."

"The Duke of Nuthe won't think it's a game when *I'm* king," Evan said.
He rose to his feet. "Sieur magician? How good is that spell of yours
for not being noticed?"

"All right, I suppose, as along as I don't hurry, and don't get wet."

"All right. Here's my plan…"

Night came eventually, as it always does. Elena's back ached from
sitting and lying on cold stone all day. Her stomach was a hard, sore
lump of hunger. She had watched, curious but too tired to ask questions,
as Eduardo had taken a small leather wallet out of one of his pockets,
cut it into two pieces, and spoken to each piece for a few seconds,
stroking it with a finger as he did so. She had also watched Kulbinder
sleeping, and felt a bit ashamed of herself for being jealous of how
comfortable he seemed to be.

The moon was a narrow blue sliver above the mountains when Eduardo
announced that it was time. He handed Elena and the prince a scrap of
leather each. "You have to put it in your mouth," he said
apologetically. "And you can't be carrying anything made of wood, or any
water."

"Are you sure these things will work?" the prince asked.

Eduardo shrugged. "As long as you stay in the moonlight. The hard part
will be the sentries at the main gate." He looked at them sadly, his
years and choices lining his face. "Well, one of the hard parts. Are you
ready?"

The children nodded. "All right. Together, now…" He pointed at the
letters he had scratched on the wall while teaching them what they had
to say. In stumbling unison they whispered the words they had memorized
and made a bargain with the universe.

Elena expected to feel something—a pang, a twinge, a tickle—but there
was nothing. Hand in pocket, she tried to snap her fingers, then tried
again. It had been so easy a moment ago, but now her fingers just
slipped past each other, or stuck, or wouldn't quite sit properly. *It's
a small thing to give up,* she told herself again firmly.

Eduardo kicked away the stones he had placed at the entrance to the
tunnel. Kulbinder slid past the brambles like a soft breeze. Elena and
the prince followed on their hands and knees. As soon as they were in
the clear, they straightened their legs, but kept their hands on the
cold, rough ground.

Elena's heart thudded in her chest as she animal-walked slowly through
Gram Teresa's vegetable patch in the moonlight, the scrap of leather
bitter in her mouth. The village was silent except for the creaking of
Fernando and Charella's door and the click-clack of the wind goose's
wings in the breeze.

Suddenly two of Duke George's soldiers came walking around the corner.
They glanced at the children, but didn't break stride. "Should round
those up tomorrow, get some milk for porridge," one of the soldiers
said.

"Don't like goats," the other grumbled. "Could've stayed home if I
wanted to milked goats."

"Yeah, but if you'd stayed home, you'd never have got to see the
mountains, would you?"

"Don't like mountains either." He glanced at the children. "Like 'em
better than goats, though."

The soldiers walked away. Elena let out a long, silent breath.

By the time they reached the main square it was all she could do not to
bolt for the gate. But just as Eduardo had predicted, there were
sentries: one stood on each side of the fortress gate, while two others
stood on the walls, and another pair walked up and down the path
outside.

She nearly jumped out of her boots when Prince Evan whispered, "Are you
ready?" Without waiting for a reply, he ambled toward the gate, pausing
for a moment to rub his head against the speaker's stump as if he really
was a goat, rather than the scared, skinny boy that she desperately
hoped no-one but her could see properly.

The sentry at the gate didn't have any particular feelings about goats,
or about mountains either. He had become a soldier because his father
had been one, and would have been the first to admit that he could just
as easily have become a shoemaker, or a lumberjack, or even a
minstrel—he was rather proud of his singing voice. His first thought
when the two goats came trotting toward the gate was, *Poor things.
Probably wondering why they haven't been milked.*

"Hey," his partner said. "One of those would make a good meal tomorrow
night, eh? Put it on a spit, put it over the fire for a couple of hours,
maybe get some onions or parsnips out of one of these gardens…"

The first sentry shook his head sadly. "Sergeant said no looting,
remember?"

"Oh, now come on," the other sentry protested. "One little goat isn't
really looting. It's just…sharing, isn't it?"

The first sentry pretended to think for a moment, then nodded. He'd had
this conversation with his fellow soldiers many times, in a dozen
villages and twice that many farms. It was just another little ritual,
another way to break up the boredom that was most of a soldier's life.
"Yeah, I guess maybe it is. It's just sharing." He took three steps to
put himself in the middle of the gate, then bent his knees a bit and
spread his arms. "Come here, mister goat," he said. "We want to share
you."

Elena saw the guard move to block their escape and almost (almost) lost
her nerve, but the prince didn't hesitate. He stuck to his ambling pace
until he was just a few steps away from the guard, then charged. The
guard's eyes went wide an instant before the tiger's head slammed into
his knees. One of the sentries standing on top of the wall laughed, "Go
on, butt him back!" as Evan dodged through the gate and dove into a
stand of alders. She ran after him as fast as her awkward gait would
allow.

Fifteen minutes later they were on the wooden platform at the edge of
the cloud pen. Kulbinder was already there, crouched ready to spring in
front of two terrified soldiers.

Elena closed her eyes again. Pillow was at the other end of the
pen—would the cloud even mind-hear her? "Come," she mind-spoke. "Come
come quickly come now quickly come."

There was a long silence, and then a faint, "…sleeping…"

"Come!" she repeated urgently. Another roar, another shout. "Come now
come *now*!"

Nothing, nothing… "Sleeping," Pillow grumbled, but her mind-voice
was stronger than it had been.

"She's coming," Elena told the prince. "She's—"

"Caw! Caw! Over here! They're over here!" The crow's harsh squawk rang
in the night like an alarm trumpet. One of the soldiers said, "Hah!" and
took a step forward. Kulbinder snarled and swatted at him with a paw.

"Magician!" the tiger bellowed. "Now!"

Elena squeezed her eyes shut. "Faster!" she begged. The breeze brushed
against her face. "Faster faster faster!"

And suddenly Pillow was there, right there, gray and grumbling and
smelling like damp wool, scraping wetly against the gorge wall just a
few strides below them.

"Now!" she shouted. She grabbed Evan's arm and jumped.

## The Price

Elena screamed. The prince probably did too, just for an instant, and
then they hit the cloud. For a moment it didn't even slow them down, but
they squelched to a damp, clammy stop a heartbeat later, up over their
heads in cloud.

"Mmmph mmmph!" Elena heard Evan trying to shout. She could feel him
clawing at the smothering cloud, trying to get his head above it.

"Up!" she mind-spoke. "Up now!" She meant "push us up", but instead
Pillow started to climb, frightened in her own turn by the fearful
urgency in Elena's voice.

She shrieked as something thumped onto the cloud beside her. "Your
Highness!" Kulbinder roared. "Your Highness, hold on!"

Like a seed being squeezed out of a melon, or a sliver out of a child's
finger, Elena's head popped up above the cloud's surface. She heaved a
lungful of air and willed herself to relax—fighting just made it harder
for Pillow to move things around. Two strides away, a panting, wide-eyed
Prince Evan had his arms wrapped around Kulbinder's neck.

Elena twisted around and shrieked again as a long, dark spear suddenly
sprouted from the cloud just out of arm's reach. "Higher!" she
mind-shouted. "Higher higher now now!"

"Sharp," Pillow mind-spoke back.

"Up!" Elena ordered as forcefully as she could. It all depended on
Eduardo now…

"Elena! Elena, over here!" Elena ducked at the shout, but it was
Eduardo's voice. Putting a hand on the tiger's back, she rose to her
knees. They were almost level with the edge of the canyon now, and there
he was on the edge with Grappa Diego's ax in his hands. She felt a burst
of relief.

"We're here!" she shouted, waving.

The magician braced his legs and brought the ax up over his head and
down, thwack! With a loud *twoing!* the strand of spider web net
anchored at his feet gave way. Three quick steps to his right, a loose
rock making him stumble before it fell tumbling down and down into the
canyon, and up came the ax again. Thwack! Twoing! Another strand gone.
The web sagged over Elena's head.

"Stay!" she ordered Pillow. Her own fear was making the cloud nervous—if
she panicked, there was no telling what would happen.

Thwack! Twoing! Thwack! Twoing! The whole corner of the section of net
above them was free now. *Hurry, hurry!* Elena thought frantically. If
they were under it when it fell, they would be tangled in it with no
hope of escape.

She didn't hear the last two strands of the web give way, just the
magician's shout of, "Up! Up and clear!" The net made a rustling sound
like water running down a board as it swung down toward the other side
of the gorge. She didn't dare raise her head to see if the soldiers in
the tunnel had more spears to throw. She just mind-spoke, "Up! Out!"
over and over again.

Her stomach dropped as Pillow shot upward again. Up, up, up, and,
"Ooph!" Eduardo landed on the cloud beside her, sinking up to his waist.

"Fly!" Elena mind-spoke. "Fly, as fast as you can!"

The only sound after that was the air rushing past their ears as Pillow
carried them higher and higher up the pass. The glaciers on the
mountains almost glowed blue-white under the silver-bright sun. Every
branch on every tree seemed to gleam in the cold air, and every crag on
every mountain looked knife-sharp. Elena saw the tracks of a pika
leading across a snowfield that had stubbornly refused to melt, even in
midsummer, and watched the shadow of an owl glide over a field without
being able to see the owl itself. For the first time in her life, she
realized just how little the mountains cared about her and everything
she loved.

Once Elena's breathing had slowed and shallowed, the tiger sighed. "We
need help, magician," he said, as if resuming an earlier conversation.

"I know," Eduardo said without turning his head. "And I know where we
can find some. But the price will be high…"

Elena must have fallen asleep again, because the next thing she
remembered was Eduardo shaking her gently. "Good morning," he said. "How
do you feel?"

"I'm tired," she yawned. She blinked her eyes, then closed them to
mind-listen. "Pillow is getting hungry," she reported. "We need to
stop."

Eduardo frowned. "Yes, we should, but I'm afraid of being followed by
that crow."

"The crow will be back in Marandine," said Kulbinder. "He wouldn't dare
attack us on his own, and even if Duke George's men have camels, they
won't have been able to keep up with us." The tiger sat down a few feet
away from Eduardo. Elena noticed that he kept shifting his feet, as if
hoping to find something solid beneath the cloud's softness.

Evan appeared as well, scrambling clumsily over a little hill that had
formed in the middle of the cloud. His eyes looked as bleary as Elena's
felt, and his clothes were rumpled. It was the first time Elena could
remember him not looking as though he had just spent an hour getting
dressed. He sat down beside Kulbinder and put his arm up around the
tiger without saying a word.

Everyone was quiet for a moment, listening to the wind blow and watching
the mountain snow shine in the silver-bright dawn. Elena couldn't
imagine anywhere else in the world looking this beautiful, or this
empty. Somehow, only the mountains seemed real. Everything else—the
trees, the sky, the cloud she was riding on, the people beside her, even
herself—seemed to be no more than toys.

Evan blinked as if waking for a second time when Eduardo cleared his
throat.

"There's a bend in the pass up ahead, just short of the new bridge" the
magician said. "We'll be out of the worst of the wind there, and Blue
will be able to find some snow. But we can't stop for very long."

"We can't just keep running," Evan protested.

"I know," said Eduardo. Elena wondered if he'd slept at all during the
long, cold night. "We'll rest a bit, then go north."

"Why north?" the prince asked.

"To find help," Eduardo told him. "Maybe." He didn't sound happy at the
idea, and refused to answer any of their questions.

The next two hours were bitterly cold. The wind was what Grappa Diego
joking called a "lazy wind": it didn't bother to go around you, it just
cut straight through. Elena's cheeks felt like slabs of ice by the time
they reached the bridge.

She brought Pillow down to the treetops so that they could climb off,
then let her drift away toward a shadowed patch of icy snow. Kulbinder
had to go down the tree backward, one paw at a time. Once on the ground
he sniffed at the pine sap on his paws and growled again in disgust.

Evan and Elena gathered some wood so that Eduardo made a fire, while
Kulbinder caught a couple of snowshoe rabbits for lunch. No-one spoke
except to say "please" and "thank you." There didn't seem to be much to
say.

After the last scrap of rabbit had been eaten, and the bones and skin
carefully buried, Eduardo stood up and stretched. "I'll be back in a
little while," he said to Elena. "Why don't you show His Highness the
new bridge while I'm gone? Who knows when he'll next have a chance to
see it?"

Elena and Evan walked slowly up the potholed mountain track to the
bridge. The forest smelled cool and moist around them. Juncos and
nutcrackers whistled and chattered in the branches above their heads,
and something the size of a small raccoon rustled through a patch of
mountain misery a few feet away. "Do you like being a prince?" Elena
asked Evan as she picked up a stone.

He thought for a few steps before replying. "I think so. You have to be
a prince before you can be king, and being king like my father is all
I've ever wanted, ever since I was little." He paused again. "But I
guess it's kind of like asking Pillow if she likes being a cloud, or
Kulbinder if he likes having a tail."

"I guess," echoed Elena.

"Do you like being able to do magic?"

"What?" said Elena, startled. "I'm not a magician."

"You can talk to the clouds in your head, and make them do what you
want. That looks like magic to me."

"I guess I never thought about it," Elena said. "Everyone I know does
it, so it doesn't seem like something special. I guess like how you're
going to be a king some day doesn't seem special to you?"

Evan shrugged. "It's no different from being a blacksmith or a farmer, I
guess." He stooped to pick up a stone of his own. "People think being a
king is about having adventures all the time, but my father spends most
of his time judging law cases, or listening to Lady Margaret explain why
we can't raise taxes to pay for repairs to the Apple Bridge. It's about
as exciting as watching soup go cold."

"So why doesn't he let someone else do it? Can't he just order Lady
whoever-she-is to fix the bridge?"

Evan shook his head. "The law says the king has to decide anything that
affects the safety of the kingdom. Or any case of murder in the capital,
or anything involving foreign magicians." He frowned. "There's another
one as well, but I can't remember what it is."

"If I was king, I'd make a new law that said other people could worry
about those things for me," Elena mused.

Prince Evan shook his head. "My tutor says that as soon as you do that,
they aren't really laws any more. He says that people's laws aren't like
magic. Magic happens the way it's supposed to whether you do anything or
not, like the sun coming up or tea going cold if you leave it on the
table. People's laws only happen if someone makes them happen. If you
let one person change a law just because they don't like it, then
there's nothing to stop everyone else changing every other law too. And
that would be like having no laws at all." Suddenly he pulled his arm
back and threw his stone as high and as far as he could. The two
children heard it go *thock!* against a tree. Elena grinned and threw
her stone. *Thock!*

The prince grinned back. "Sounded like the same tree."

Elena nodded. "I bet it was." She almost reached out to take his hand as
they started walking again. Almost.

Eduardo had returned by the time they got back. "I was about to send
Kulbinder off after you," he said. "Where have you been?"

"Throwing rocks at trees," said Elena. Kulbinder turned his head and
stared at the prince, who blushed slightly.

"Well, never mind that," said Eduardo. "Here." He handed them each a dry
brown leaf. "Keep this with you, and don't lose it."

"What's it for?" Elena asked. It didn't look special, but she remembered
what the magician had done with the four stones in the tunnel.

"It'll be cold where we're going," Eduardo told them. "This will keep
you warm."

"It's more magic, isn't it?" Elena said. Eduardo nodded, then smiled.
One of his front teeth was missing.

They let Pillow pick her own pace as they flew north, rising hour by
hour as the pass snaked between the sharp mountains. The last trees were
far below them, and only an occasional clump of saxifrage or cutleaf
daisy clung to the rocks. The air was so clear that it almost hurt to
breathe.

Finally Eduardo pointed and said, "There. Up over that." Off in the
distance a narrow mountain valley hung above the pass, filled to the
brim by a pristine white glacier. A tumble of snow and broken ice made a
jumbled white fan beneath it.

Pillow had to circle twice to gain enough altitude to get over the lip
of the glacier. Elena was so cold that she reached into her pocket to
hold her magic leaf, but Eduardo said, "Not yet. Not until you really
have to."

"I *do* really have to," Elena chattered, but she pulled her hand out of
her pocket and pulled the prince's cloak tighter around her. She,
Kulbinder, and Evan were huddled together to stay warm. Eduardo didn't
seem to notice, even though his toenails were turning blue.

They raced along the glacier. The mountains rose on either side of them
like Marandine's ancient walls. There were no flowers, nothing green,
not even any of the gray-brown lichens the cloudherds called "belly
scrapings". It was like the first day of the world, or the last, with
nothing around but jagged rocks and glaciers glistening like newly-made
gems in the sun.

Suddenly Kulbinder stiffened and hissed, "What is that?"

"What?" asked Evan and Elena together. They struggled to their feet.

"Magician!" snarled Kulbinder. "I smell burnt air, and I hear drums.
What is this place?"

Eduardo took a deep breath, then let it out slowly. "The Valley of
Lightnings."

Elena gasped. "The what?" Evan asked.

Eduardo didn't turn his head. "There," he pointed. "And there. See
them?"

Elena stared at the horizon. "Turn your head a bit," Evan told her. "Try
looking out of the corner of your eye. Sergeant Crimes taught me." Sure
enough, when Elena looked at one of the peaks, instead of straight up
the valley, she could suddenly see little flashes of light darting from
place to place. A few heartbeats later she heard the *szzzzzt!* and
*crack!* of the lightnings' dance.

"Sharp brights!" she mind-heard. Pillow slowed beneath them.

"Friends," Elena mind-spoke back, trying to soothe the frightened cloud.

"Sharp brights not-friend," Pillow mind-spoke emphatically, but she kept
moving.

Then it happened. One moment the lightnings were tiny sparks on the
horizon, and the next they were dazzling and dancing around the
travellers. Up close they were almost invisible, just shimmering wisps
like colored ripples in the air. They crackled like twigs being broken,
over and over.

Elena and Evan cried out with fear. Kulbinder snarled, his ears pulled
back and his hair standing on end. "Friends!" Elena mind-spoke at Pillow
frantically. "No hurting!" She had to close her eyes—she knew she
wouldn't be able to convince the cloud as long as she could see the
lightnings herself.

"WHAT WHY HERE WHY YOU COME WHY COME WHY?" The angry words burst into
Elena's mind like a shout. She gasped, and her eyes snapped open. Evan
was staring at her with a frightened look on his face. He could hear it
too, she realized. It was like mind-speech, but so powerful that it felt
like someone else was using her brain to think with.

At the same instant she realized that her hands and feet had gone numb.
She fumbled at her pocket, but couldn't get the button undone. Evan
pushed her hand out of the way and undid it for her. As soon as her
fingers touched the leaf that Eduardo had given her, the freezing chill
seemed to ease reluctantly out of her bones.

Eduardo raised his arms. "You know me!" he shouted. "You know me, as you
knew my mother before me and her father before her, and their mothers
and fathers back to the time when the ice was young!"

"WHY WHY HERE WHY COME NOT TIME!" The lightnings flickered red blue
purple blue green blue red.

"I know it's not my time!" Eduardo shouted. "But I need your help! We
all need your help! Men have come from the plains, evil men. They plan
to take the clouds to war! You know the old law! The mountains and the
plains shall each keep to their own! You must help us stop this thing!"

The lightnings rippled with yellow and green. "MEN TREES WATER CLOUDS
MEN LIGHTNING NOT LIGHTNING."

"No, we are not made of lightning like you, but the law is the law!"
Eduardo sounded desperate. Elena suddenly realized that he didn't know
if the lightnings would help them or not.

The thought that came into her mind was almost amused. "MEN LAWS SLOW
DULL NOT LIGHTNING NOT LIGHTNING."

"But the law!" Eduardo protested. "They would make weapons of the
clouds!"

"SLOW DULL NOT LIGHTNING CLOUDS NOT LIGHTNING NOT LIGHTNING LAWS," the
lightnings mind-spoke dismissively.

"If not for the law, then for power!" Eduardo shouted at them. "Look
into me! I will give you anything I am if you will aid us!"

There was a moment of stillness, and deep, biting cold, before the
lightnings replied. "EMPTY NOTHING GIVEN ALL AWAY NOT ENOUGH YOU EMPTY
NOT ENOUGH." There was a sizzle, then another, as the lightnings began
to flash away.

"Wait!" Elena mind-thought desperately. She felt the lightnings'
attention turn to her, and felt their surprise.

"SLOW DULL NOT MAGICIAN DULL SPEAK NOT MAGICIAN SPEAK?"

"Not magician," she agreed. "Slow and dull. But!" She reached out and
ran her fingers lightly over a puff of cloud, concentrating as hard as
she could on the sensation. "Touch," she thought.

"!!!" the lightnings mind-spoke back. There was a buzzing, almost like a
conversation in another room, that she could barely mind-hear. She
realized they were talking amongst themselves.

"You could have touch," she mind-spoke again, as persuasively as she
could. "Touch, taste, water running through your fingers, hot porridge
sugar on your tongue, the smell of thimbleberry pie baking… You
could have."

"What are you doing?" Eduardo gasped.

"Chocolate," Elena continued. "Kitten fur. Warm under covers. Cold water
on face. Hugs…"

Eduardo grabbed her by the shoulders and shook her. "What… are…
you… doing…?" he hissed. "Girl, have you gone mad?"

Elena pushed him away. "They have to help us! And if they won't do it
for the law, maybe they'll do it for something else."

"For what? Dear girl, what are you thinking?" Elena could see the horror
in Eduardo's eyes, and feel Evan and Kulbinder staring.

"For touch," she said simply, knowing that he already knew. "I've heard
Gram Teresa's stories since I was little. If I give them my permission,
they can take over my body and know what it's like to have touch and
smell and taste. Maybe they'll help us for that."

Kulbinder snarled. Eduardo groaned. "Girl, girl, you don't know what
you're doing! The lightnings can survive without bodies, but you can't!
When they get bored and leave you, your body will be as empty as a boot
without a foot in it! And your ghost will wander until the ice melts!"

"I don't care," said Elena stubbornly. She fought against tears. "We
have to do something!" She turned to face the lightnings again. Before
Eduardo could stop her, she spread her arms and closed her eyes and—

—and heard Evan shout, "Children of the sky! You of the thousand and one
colors! Hear me! I am Evan Prince Ensworth, fourth of that name. I am a
plainsman, but even on the plains, we speak of the beauty and terrible
strength of the blades of light that never grow dull. Hear me, for I
would beg for your aid!"

"SLOW DULL WORDS SLOW DULL BORING," came back disdainfully.

Evan set his jaw. "Yes, slow, and dull, but I have something to offer
you. Look inside me! Look in my heart! If you will help us as the
magician has asked, I will give you something you have never had,
something of great power." He closed his eyes and took a deep breath.
The look of concentration on his face was so powerful, so painful, that
Elena could almost hear him think.

There was a pause, just a heartbeat. Elena felt the lightnings probe,
searching, and then for the first time she mind-heard hesitation from
them. "THRONE POWER MAJESTY NOT SLOW DULL NOT YOURS NOT YOURS TO GIVE."

"No, the throne isn't mine," Evan agreed. He was no longer shouting. He
didn't need to—he knew the lightnings were listening carefully now. "But
it is all I have ever been, and that's what matters, isn't it? That's
what makes it magic?"

"Your Highness, you can't—" Kulbinder started.

"Be still!" the prince snapped. "If people can give up their lives for
me, I can give up my throne for them. What say you?" he shouted again.
"Have we a bargain?"

There was another pause. It stretched until Elena thought she would
scream. Finally the lightnings spoke again. "WHAT WHERE WHEN HOW?"

## The End

Pillow was the only cloud in the sky as they drifted down the pass
toward Marandine. "There!" Kulbinder snarled as they came around the
final bend. "Those are a crow's wings, or my eyes are older than they
should be."

Elena glanced up at the patrolling bird, then back at her home. The
soldiers on the walls had seen them, of course—a single cloud swimming
against the wind is a hard thing to miss. Half of Duke George's soldiers
were watching as Pillow touched down on the mountain road in front of
the fortress gate. Kulbinder dismounted with a single smooth leap and
loped toward the village. The crow circled overhead as Pillow lifted off
again. He swooped low to caw at Kulbinder, but the tiger ignored his
taunts.

Two dozen soldiers waited for Kulbinder at the old fortress gate. Their
armor was scratched and dinged, and the green feathers in their helmets
had seen better days.

Kulbinder stopped a few yards away. "In the name of Evan Prince
Ensworth, son of Peter King Ensworth, as his chosen herald, I salute
you," the tiger said formally.

"And in the name of George King Nuthe, I return that greeting, and swear
safe parley," the enemy sergeant replied, equally formally. "Your fame
stretches before you like a long shadow, Kulbinder of Thind."

"As your lord's infamy stretches before you," the cat purred. "When even
the ghosts of our ghosts have been laid to rest, still people will talk
of how you sowed war where it should never have grown, but reaped only
your own disaster."

The sergeant's face darkened. His men murmured behind him. "Strong
words," he said in a voice that was colder and louder than it had been.
"Have you a strong arm to make them stick?"

Kulbinder's tail twitched. "Arms? I have no arms, nor need of them. But
still, I have the right of it, have I not?"

"Half right, perhaps," the sergeant replied. "Surrender the prince to
us, and I give you my word, he will not be harmed if his father ends his
unjust war."

The tiger had been watching the soldiers while the sergeant spoke. Their
gaze had gone higher and higher as Pillow circled into position. The
archers on the old fortress walls had raised their bows, one arrow on
the string and another clenched between their teeth. It was now or
never.

"No!" Kulbinder snarled. "No, you shall not! In the name of Peter King
Ensworth, and by right of ancient law, I command you to surrender
yourself and your armies, and to place yourself before the king's
justice!"

The sergeant laughed. "Surrender? To a feeble old man, two children, and
an old tomcat?"

"No," hissed Kulbinder. "To a great magician, two great hearts, and your
doom wearing black and yellow fur!" He roared for all he was worth.

Up on the cloud, Evan heard the tiger's signal. He stood, raised his
arms, and shouted the word that Eduardo had taught him. There was a
tremendous sun-bright flash as the lightnings that had been hiding in
the terrified cloud's nooks and crannies burst forth.

Elena was blinded by their dazzle. She heard the *boom!* of thunder just
a few feet in front of her, and smelled air burning. Then she heard an
even louder *boom!*, and a rumble that went on and on.

"What's happening? What's happening?" she shouted.

"I don't know," Evan shouted back. "I can't see."

"I can't see either," said Elena. She didn't know who had reached for
whom, but she and Evan were holding hands.

"That was the south tower," Eduardo said, not shouting but loudly enough
to carry above the sound of the destruction below them. "The lightnings
blasted the top right off it. And there! Your wind goose will need a new
pole, Elena."

"We have to get down," Elena said. Her mouth went dry as the dazzle
spots cleared from her eyes and she began to see what was happening. A
dozen houses were burning, and the soldiers— "Down!" she frantically
mind-shouted at Pillow. "Down! Down!"

The soldiers scattered in panic as the lightnings played around them.
They had fought men, and trolls, and the hundred-legged things that
sometimes came crawling out of the Blight, but who could fight this?

In the middle of it all their sergeant shouted, "Cowards! Cowards! Come
back here! I command you!" One of his soldiers, briefly blinded by the
light, stumbled into him as he tried to run. The sergeant tore the
soldier's sword from his hand and whirled around to face Kulbinder.

"You!" he spat. "You mangy scrap of fur! I am going to make a carpet out
of you, do you hear me?" He raised his sword and charged at the tiger.

Kulbinder snarled a curse in Thindi and leaped sideways. He dodged under
the first swing, then twisted around as only a cat can to claw at the
man's face. His claws left deep scratches on the sergeant's armor as his
weight carried them both off their feet. The two rolled over and over,
Kulbinder snarling and snapping as the sergeant tried to get his hands
around the tiger's throat.

Above them Evan shouted, "Bring us down! Bring us down! Faster!" His
hands were clenched into fists. "We have to help him!"

"I'm trying!" Elena said desperately, mind-speaking, "Down! Down!" at
Pillow.

"Sharp brights," the old cloud replied, but brought them down anyway.
Evan leaped over the side of the cloud the instant they bumped into the
ground. Elena and Eduardo slithered off behind him.

"Good good good," Elena mind-spoke, but the cloud was already rising.

Just then she heard Evan cry, "Kulbinder! Look out!" She spun around.
The tiger and his opponent were rolling toward the edge of the gorge!
Evan raced toward them, but he was too late! The last thing Elena heard
as they rolled over the side was Kulbinder snarl in rage.

Someone grabbed her and spun her around. She started to scream, but then
her mother's arms went around her in the biggest, fiercest hug of her
life. Elena froze for a moment, hardly able to believe it was over, then
wrapped her arms around her mother and squeezed her back.

"Oh, daffodil," Yolanda wept, her voice breaking. "I was so scared. I
was so scared."

"Me too," said Elena, her face buried in her mother's shoulder.

Yolanda finally straightened up and brushed the tears off her daughter's
face. As she did so Elena heard Evan cry, "Kulbinder!" He was standing
at the edge of the cliff. "Kulbinder, hang on!"

Elena ran to join him. "Where is he?"

"Down there! Quickly, get help!" Before Elena could stop him, the prince
slid over the edge and started picking his way down the steep rock face.

The tiger was wedged between a rock and a manzanita bush. His fur was
wet with blood, but his eyes were bright. "Boy…" he panted.

Evan pulled off his shirt and pressed it against the tiger's side to
staunch the bleeding. "I thought I'd lost you too," he said.

The tiger licked his arm with a tongue like a warm piece of sandpaper.
"Don't you know cats always land on their feet?" he wheezed. He tried to
gather his feet beneath him, then fell back limply.

"Don't try to move," Evan ordered. "They'll be here soon." The tiger
licked his arm again, but didn't speak.

## The Beginning

Elena woke up in her own bed early the next morning. For a moment she
just lay there, wishing that it could all have been a dream, but knowing
that it wasn't. The aches in her muscles from her long, cold ride, and
the smell of burnt homes that lingered in the air, wouldn't let her
pretend.

She slid out from beneath her blankets as quietly as she could, pulled
on her clothes, and slipped out into the village. The main square was
covered with rubble from the blasted walls. The scorch marks on the
walls looked like the brown soot shadows that candles left on lanterns.
A few wisps of smoke still rose from what was left of the wind goose's
pole, and a soldier's helmet lay beside the speaker's stump, bright with
dew.

One of Duke George's soldiers stood at attention outside the trading
hall. They had surrendered once they knew that their own prince was
dead. Elena walked past him as if he didn't exist, though her heart beat
a little faster as she did so. The guard just stood there and looked
straight ahead, thinking about whatever soldiers think about when they
have lost a war.

Gram Teresa opened the door of the guesthouse when she knocked. "He'll
be all right," she said, hugging her granddaughter. "Cats are tough, and
big old cats like him are the toughest. It's the little kittens like you
that we all have to worry about."

"Is Eduardo still here?" Elena asked.

"I think so. He was up on the Round Tower the last time I saw him,
trying to talk Grappa Diego out of dropping Duke George's soldiers off a
cloud one by one. If you see him, could you—Elena? Elena?" But her
granddaughter was already gone.

Elena looked on the Round Tower, and on the wall, and around the base of
what was left of the South and Quick Towers, but she couldn't find the
magician. Finally she gave up and went looking for Evan instead.

"I'm sorry to hear that," the prince said when she found him. He
standing on the wall where they had flown the kite. "I wanted to say
goodbye."

"Goodbye?" Elena immediately felt stupid. Of course—he would be leaving
now.

The prince nodded, a bit sadly. "I asked Eduardo to send word to my
father. A troop of soldiers should get here in a few days. I'll have to
go back to Ensworth then."

"Have to?" said a voice behind them. "Have to is for magicians. You can
do whatever you want."

Eduardo was standing behind them with his pack on one shoulder and a
walking stick in his other hand. He settled himself slowly on a block of
stone. "Have you thought about what you're going to tell your father?"

Evan shrugged and shook his head. "The truth, I suppose. Some good men
died."

"That's not what I meant." Eduardo shifted his pack on his shoulder.

The prince smiled wryly. "I know. When we were little, my brother Colin
used to say that he ought to be king because he's taller than me. I
guess now he'll get his wish."

"And what will you be instead of a king?" Eduardo asked.

Evan shrugged again. "I don't know. Being king was…" He trailed off.
"It's like when you told Elena that if she let the lightnings take over
her body, it would be empty when they left it. I feel empty like that."

The magician smiled softly. "It'll pass." He bowed deeply toward them,
flourishing his walking stick like a scepter. "My lady, my lord," he
said. "May your days be long and happy." He turned to go, then stopped
and smacking his forehead with the palm of his hand. "Silly me, I almost
forgot. Here." He fished a small package out of his pack and handed it
to Elena.

"What is it?" Elena asked, then looked up. The magician was gone. She
gasped. "Where did he…?"

"Oh, Barramarrabee does that all the time," said Evan dismissively.
"What's in the package?"

Elena tore it open. Inside was a bright square of silk, painted in a
dozen different colors, and a large ball of spider web thread. She and
Evan looked at each other for a moment, then ran off together to find
some sticks to make a new kite.
