<!-- 2016-04-24 -->
## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, it measures eight
thousand gallops from north to south and six thousand from east to
west.  Its single continent is surrounded on all sides by a great
ocean, whose outer shore, the Worldrim, rises up to hold that sweet
speck of life as a child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Cherne's history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with
them as well.  Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a long
Mutiny that scarred the moon, turned Lake Karaband into a sea of
glass, and littered the land with strange magic.  When it was over the
Pilots were gone, leaving the world to carry on as best it
could.*

*Now look there, in the north, where the Brumoso Mountains rise above
the endless squabbles of the Ninety Kingdoms and a girl is doing her
chores.  She is no longer a child but not yet an adult, and has no
idea that her world is about to change forever...*

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 1: Soldiers

Noxy was collecting spiderwebs when the soldiers came to Stale.
Winter had turned to spring, and the sun shone diamond-bright in a
clear blue sky, but stubborn crusts of snow still lurked in the
shadows of the twisted mountain pines.

"Shoo."  She poked a fat brown squirrel spider with a stick.  It waved
its hairy forelegs at her indignantly before scuttling away to make a
new home.  Noxy cut its web's anchor threads with two practiced twists
of her knife and began winding it onto a stick.

"Do you think I should put new buttons on my coat?" Sensy asked.

Noxy glanced at her.  "Why? Are those ones coming loose?"

"No." Sensy looked down at her soft brown goofskin coat critically.
"They're just kind of plain.  Granna Fee has some really nice red
ones.  She said she'd give them to me if I picked the stones out of
her pepper garden."

"Her whole garden? That would take forever." Noxy shook the dew off
the spider's web and stuffed it into the loosely-woven bag slung over
her shoulder.  "Why would you do all that work for buttons you don't
need?"

"Oh, you're no help," Sensy pouted.  She had spent the winter
embroidering red and green patterns on her jacket's cuffs and collar.
All she seemed to want to talk about any more was her clothes, and her
hair, and the boys she and Noxy might meet that summer, who couldn't
possibly be as boring as the ones in Stale.  Especially
Rash---practically *anyone* would be more fun to be around than Rash.

"A lot of girls are like that when they get their changes," Granna Fee
had said when Noxy had complained about the flighty stranger who
seemed to have taken her best friend's place.

"Not me!" Noxy had declared.

Her grandmother had laughed.  "No, daffodil, not you."

Noxy was reaching for another web when a high-pitched voice shouted,
"Soldiers! Soldiers!"

"Oh, wonderful," she sighed, rolling her eyes at Sensy.  The whole
point of going out to collect spiderwebs that morning had been to get
*away* from the younger children for a few hours.

Young Gas crashed through a bush and tripped over a root, then picked
himself up and ran over to the two girls.  "There's soldiers in the
village!" he said breathlessly, tugging at Noxy's sleeve.  "And
they've been fighting!  And there's a *tiger* with them!"

"Sure," Noxy said wearily, pulling her arm away.  "And there's a
dragon under your bed."  The mountains that lined the pass below Stale
were still covered in snow.  Avalanches happened almost every
day---someone would have to be foolish *and* desperate to be on the
road this early in the spring.

"But they're *real*!" Young Gas protested, hopping from one foot to
another.  "They've got swords, and some of them are bleeding!  And the
tiger can *talk*!"

Noxy opened her mouth to say, "Why don't you go jump in the fishpond?"
but a deep *doom doom* cut her off.  She and Sensy looked at each
other wide-eyed.  *Doom doom*, pause.  *Doom doom*, pause.  It was
Stale's home drum.  It meant a house was on fire, or a bear had
wandered into the village, or someone was lost in a storm and needed
help to find their way home.  It meant trouble.

Noxy hung her bag on a nearby branch.  "Come on!" she told Sensy.

"I told you!" Young Gas shouted behind them. "Hey, wait for me!"

The path was one of dozens that wound through the evergreen forest
that surrounded Stale.  Mud made it slippery where it wasn't slick
with ice, but Noxy didn't slow down until she reached the ridge above
the village.

She paused to catch her breath.  Below her lay the ancient walls of
the fortress of Stale.  Centuries of rain and snow had rounded the
edges off the Pilots' stonework, making it look like a snow fort
that was just starting to melt, but it was still as solid as the
mountains themselves.  The village's two-story wooden houses sheltered
inside the walls like ducklings in a nest.  Thin licks of smoke rose
from their slate chimneys, while goof pens, vegetable plots, and racks
laden with drying spiderwebs filled the spaces between them.

To the west, the wall dropped straight into a steep-sided gorge.  A
net woven from squirrel spider thread was stretched over its top, as
light as a dream but as strong as steel.  Another net hung down at the
gorge's mouth to make a gate.  Inside, just visible from the ridge,
two gray clouds floated half-asleep.

Noxy had spent every moment she could that winter watching the clouds,
riding them, and, most importantly, learning how to mind-talk to them.
Grownups said this pair were slow and lazy, but they were the most
exciting things in Noxy's world.  They, and the herd of half-wild
clouds grazing on the mountain peaks in the distance, were the reason
Stale existed.

Noxy was about to set off again when Sensy grabbed her.  "Wait!" her
friend hissed, pointing into the trees.  For a moment all Noxy saw was
branches.  Then a pair of brown eyes blinked, and her mouth suddenly
went dry.

As she and Sensy started to back up, one slow step at a time, Little
Gas came pelting down the path behind them and ran straight into Noxy,
nearly knocking her off her feet.  "Whoa!" he exclaimed, "What's
happening?  Why did you---mmph!"

"Don't move!" Noxy whispered, her hand clamped over his mouth.
"Just... don't move."

Before Young Gas could protest, the hairy creature who had been
watching leaped for the nearest branch and swung himself up into the
tree.  He paused for a moment to study the trio again, his gray fur
silvered with age on his head and shoulders and his eyes old and sad,
then disappeared into the greenery.

Sensy was the first to speak.  "Wh-what's a troll doing *here*?" she
asked shakily.

Noxy shook her head.  "Worry about that later.  Come on!"

The drum had stopped booming by the time the three children reached
the gap in the wall where an enormous counterbalanced stone door had
hung centuries ago.  The wooden replacement that Stale's current human
inhabitants had put up in its place was as solid as they could make
it, but still looked like a child's toy next to the Pilots'
ancient work.

Inside, it seemed like the whole village was standing in the cobbled
square---or rather, the whole village minus most of the adults, who
had left a week ago for the snowfields to collect Stale's clouds from
their winter pasture.  Three hundred people, from babies in their
mothers' arms to Grappa Gas with his cane, stood in a half-circle on
one side of the square.  A dozen soldiers stood at attention in front
of them.  They wore steel helmets with yellow feathers on their crests
and masks painted with fierce swirls of red and black on their faces.
Stiffened leather armor as thick as bootsoles that reached from their
shoulders to their waists, while heavy wool kilts brushed against the
tops of their sturdy knee-high leather boots.  Each soldier had a
sword in a scabbard on his hip and a pack on his back.

And Young Gas had been right: they had been fighting.  One man's hand
was wrapped in a bloody bandage, while another's arm was in a sling.
None of them had washed or shaved in days, and from their haggard
faces, it didn't look like they had slept much either.

But Noxy didn't see any of that right away.  What she saw instead was
the tiger.  His fur was yellow-brown with dark brown stripes, not
orange and black like the picture in the book that three generations
of village children had passed around.  A pair of golden earrings hung
from his left ear, and his tail twitched slightly, as if the assembled
villagers reminded him that he had not yet eaten lunch.

A boy stood beside him, armored like the soldiers and carrying a pack
as large as any of theirs, but with his mask in his hand.  When he
turned his head, Noxy saw four half-healed scars on his cheek, angry
red against his near-black skin.  His back was straight, but he was
trembling, though whether it was because of the cold, weariness, fear,
or all three, Noxy couldn't tell.

Sensy tugged at Noxy's sleeve.  "Who *are* they?"

"Sh!" Noxy whispered back, not willing to admit that she didn't know.
"I'm trying to hear!"

Noxy's mother Indy nodded at the soldier she had been speaking to and
stepped up onto the speaker's stone that lay in the center of the
square.  "Friends," she said in a loud voice, patting the air with her
hands to quiet the villagers.  "Friends, please.  Thank you all for
coming.  I know it is early in the year for travellers, but please,
bid welcome to Sergeant Dorbu, of the Angry Canary troop."  The
soldier she had been speaking to bowed to the villagers.

"And to the Gifted Kulbinder, also of the Angry Canaries," Indy
continued, gesturing toward the tiger.  "They and their companions
will be our guests for the next little while."

"How long's a little while?" Aft asked loudly.  Noxy winced.  Aft had
stayed in the village instead of going to round up other adults
because his wife was expecting a baby.  He was the best cloudherd in
the village, at least in his own estimation, but had the manners of a
constipated goof.

"Until they are ready to travel again," Indy reassured him.  Her eyes
swept across the crowd.  "Their journey has been a hard one---they
hoped to get through to Chaghan, but the forest had other plans.
Sergeant?  Would you like to say a few words?"

The sergeant bowed again and stepped up onto the speaker's stone as
Indy stepped down.  Like the rest of the soldiers, his skin was black
compared to the villagers' dark brown, and his wiry hair was trimmed
to a thin fuzz.  Two yellow ribbons, exactly the same color as the
feathers in his helmet, ringed his left sleeve.

It took him a moment to undo the ties that held his mask in place.
Once it was off, he smiled at the villagers and opened his mouth to
speak, but Aft spoke again before he could get a word out.  "You lot
loyalists?"  the cloudherd asked loudly.

"Give the man a chance to speak!" Grappa Gas said just as loudly,
rapping his cane against his wooden leg.  He and his son glared at
each other.

"You two behave," Granna Fee scolded them.  Noxy's grandmother was a
head shorter than either of the men, but the iron in her voice quieted
them both down.  She nodded at the sergeant.  "Go ahead, young man."

"Um, thank you, respected" the soldier said gratefully.  "And thank
you, people of Stale.  As your mayor said, my comrades and I were
trying to see if the pass to Chaghan was clear yet.  We---" He paused
for a moment before continuing.  "We were attacked three days ago and
driven off the road into the forest.  Everything seemed all right at
first, but then the forest must have spoken to the trolls and..."  He
shrugged.  "Well, you can probably guess what happened next."

Voices murmured.  The Herd of Trees covered the Brumoso Mountains from
wheat fields of Uws in the south to Garheim's frigid shores in the
north and the Ninety Kingdoms in the west.  It wasn't as cruel as the
Jungle of Thind, but it guarded its territory and privileges as
jealously as a bear guarded her cubs.  Gifted creatures that wanted to
live in the forest had to do her bidding.  And humans were not welcome
inside its borders at all, not unless they stuck to the handful of
roads built long ago by the Pilots.  Travellers who strayed were
rarely given warnings, and *never* given second chances.

A cold breeze whipped the sergeant's words across the square as he
continued.  "We finally made it back to the road, but the worst of our
hurt couldn't keep going, so we left them in camp with a few of the
able-bodied and came here looking for help.  They won't be able to
keep the trolls at bay for long."

Aft broke the silence that followed.  "So which side of the fight
*are* you on?" he asked, his voice still belligerent but three notches
less rude than it had been.

"I have the privilege of serving the most respected Princess
Shudarga," Sergeant Dorbu said calmly.

"Rebels..." breathed a voice behind Noxy.  She and Sensy jumped and
spun around.  Rash had sidled up behind the two girls, but instead of
poking them in the ribs as he usually would, he had been listening to
the soldiers.

"Goof," Sensy muttered, punching his arm before turning her back on
him.  Rash grinned at Noxy, who scowled in return and pointedly turned
her back on him as well.

"Does that mean King Denpa's boys are going to come calling after
you?"  Grappa Gas demanded, waving down his son before Aft could speak
again.  As with everything else, they had chosen opposite sides when
Princess Shudarga raised her flag the previous summer.  "Because if
they do, these walls won't keep 'em out for long, and neither will
we."

The smile slipped from the sergeant's face.  Noxy suddenly saw how
weary he was.  "We didn't choose Stale for its walls, respected.  We
didn't choose it at all.  We just washed up here because we couldn't
go any further.  Our friends need help.  If you're afraid that'll
bring trouble, we'll understand if you send us on our way."

"Nobody is turning anyone away," Indy said firmly.  "We mountain folk
take pride in our hospitality.  We may not have much, but I'm sure we
can find some spare blankets to keep you warm and stretch our stores
enough to feed you for a few days."

"Thank you, respected," the sergeant said, bowing again.  "But what we
really want right now is a couple of clouds so we can go and rescue
our friends."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 2: Not Quite What We Were Expecting

The next five minutes were chaos.  Out of the question, Grappa Gas
said, whacking his wooden leg with his cane to emphasize his points.
The law might forgive them giving shelter to a bunch of strays who
wandered in out of the cold, even if they were rebels, but flying off
to rescue their friends?  Why, when the *tralpa* came back---

---they'd show him the gate and send him on his way, Aft cut in, arms
crossed and brows knotted.  The lazy good-for-nothing had run for the
capital the day word of the rebellion had reached the mountains, and
hadn't been seen since.  As far as Aft was concerned, he'd given up
any right he might once have had to rent laws to anyone.  Anyway, if
they were going to shelter rebels, the king wouldn't care if they'd
come to Stale or Stale had gone to them.  And anyway again, what would
other cloudherds say if they heard that Stalers had left men in the
forest to die?  Pilots' names, what would their own folk say when they
got back from up the mountain?

The argument swirled and churned across the cobblestones.  Little
whirlpools of disagreement came together, spun about, and flew apart
as people overheard neighbors they disagreed with, or turned around to
agree with something they had overheard and were sucked into yet
another "but what if?"

"This is going to go on forever," Noxy said sourly.  "They all know
they're going to do whatever my *amma* want to do in the end---why
don't they just get on with it?"  She, Sensy, and Rash had stayed
aloof on the sidelines, old enough that they hadn't grown bored and
run off with Young Gas and the other children, but young enough that
the whole thing seemed vaguely ridiculous.

Rash ran a finger along the lip fuzz he insisted on calling a
mustache.  It had become a habit over the winter, one that Noxy had
told him countless times he ought to break before *someone* broke his
stupid finger.  "What I want to know is whether we're going to get to
go, or if we're going to be stuck here with the littles.  Again."

"Of course we'll get to go!" Noxy exclaimed.

"Are you sure?"  Rash raised an eyebrow, another annoying trick he had
developed while his broken leg had been healing through the winter.

Noxy puffed an annoyed breath, biting off her "of course I'm sure!"
when she caught Sensy's uncertain look.  "Wait here," she said with a
scowl.

She strode toward the center of the square, slowing as she neared the
speaker's stone.  Her mother was speaking intently with the sergeant.
The tiger sat impassively on his haunches next to them, his tail
twitching occasionally.  The boy with the scarred face still stood
beside him, his pack on the ground.  He looked like he was beyond
exhausted, but when his eyelids started to droop, the tiger growled
quietly and he snapped to attention again.

Noxy's mother caught sight of her.  "Oh, and this is my daughter,
Probably Noxious."

"Respected Noxious."  The sergeant bowed slightly.

Noxy hesitated, wondering if she was supposed to bow back, and was
immediately annoyed at herself.  Cloudherds didn't bow---that was a
silly lowlander custom.  "Just call me Noxy," she told him.  "*Amma*,
which cloud do you want me and Sensy and Rash on?  We can go and start
getting them ready while everyone's still jawing."

Indy gave her daughter a look that Noxy knew all too well.  "Who said
anything about you three going?"

But Noxy knew her mother almost as well as her mother knew her, and
had assembled her arguments as she crossed the square.  They were
definitely old enough---why, they were all going to be riding *real*
clouds in a few weeks, not just tame old pair floating about in the
cloud pen.  And they wouldn't be going far, just a few gallops down
the pass, and it was really important for cloudherds to know how to do
rescues, wasn't it?  And---

"Stop."  Her mother held up a hand, not noticing or just ignoring the
grin that had quirked the corner of Sergeant Dorbu's mouth.  "You can
go.  But!" she continued, "But you ride with Grappa Gas and Granna
Fee, and that's all you do---ride.  Understood?"

Noxy nodded obediently.  "Yes, *amma*."  She had learned the hard way
not to keep asking for a whole orange when she'd already talked her
mother into a half.

It only took the villagers a few minutes to gather what they needed.
Rockfalls and avalanches were common in the mountains, and more than
one tinker or trader had needed to be lifted out of a difficult spot
after running into a bear or being set upon by trolls.  Coils of hemp
rope with spider-silk cores hung ready in the long shed next to the
cloud pen, and everyone kept an extra goofskin cap somewhere handy,
just in case.

"You look ridiculous," Sensy told Rash flatly as he came down the
wooden steps to the mounting platform.  He had been learning to
embroider during that winter's enforced idleness, and had stitched
what he claimed were eagle's wings onto the side flaps of his cap.

Rash looked her up and down.  "Really?  Because I think you look
amazing.  Excuse me."  He winked at Noxy and stepped around the
speechless 13-year-old to take his place on the platform.

"Ears all!" Aft called out, clapping his hands.  Despite the cold, he
was only wearing a sleeveless goofskin vest, knee-length wool shorts,
and a sturdy pair of boots.  His hair was pulled back in a thick club
braid, a blue ribbon from his wife's wedding collar woven into it for
luck.  "You know how this is done.  I'm fore on Big Blue, Gas and Fee
will have Pillow for spotter.  We'll down, lift, and out, quick and
simple, and get our new friends back here for soup before you can
sneeze.  No adventures, right?"  He turned a steely glare toward Noxy,
Sensy, and Rash, who nodded and mumbled, "No adventures."

"Right!"  And without anything more than that he walked out to the end
of the plank that stuck out three strides from the platform, looked
down to check that Big Blue was below him, and jumped.

Noxy leaned over the railing and held her breath.  One, two,
three... Big Blue dimpled under Aft's weight as the burly cloudherd
hit him dead center.  Gray waves rippled out across the cloud's back
as Aft rolled over onto his knees and pressed his hands down firmly.
Noxy couldn't see his face, but she knew his eyes would be closed in
concentration as he mind-spoke to his mount, rousing it from its
winter half-sleep.

Something twinged in the back of her head.  She blinked, momentarily
disoriented.  "Did you say something?" she asked Sensy.

"What?"  She and Rash were watching Aft just as intently as Noxy.

"I said---never mind."  Noxy shook her head.  "Look, he's coming up."

Big Blue rose slowly toward the platform, bunching up into a firmer
mass as he came.  Aft had risen to one knee, but kept one hand on the
cloud's back so that he could continue to mind-talk to it.  A
silver-tipped scaw shot out of its cliffside nest, cawing its
displeasure at the sight of a human just a few strides away.

Aft looked up and smiled the smile he only ever wore when he was on
cloudback or had his arm around his wife.  "You want me to get Pillow
for you?" he called up to his father.

"No need, I can---damn that boy!"  Grappa Gas harrumphed as Aft took
three long steps across Big Blue's back and launched himself into the
air again.

Rash whistled.  "Nice leap," he said appreciatively as Aft landed
right in the middle of Pillow.  "And blind, too."

"It's not such a trick," Noxy said dismissively, though she was
secretly impressed.  "He must have got Big Blue to tell him where she
was."

"Sure, but would you trust a cloud's directions that much?"  Rash
challenged her.  "Most of the time I can't make cheese or cherries out
of what they say."

Noxy shrugged.  She had realized early in their training that
mind-talking was a lot easier for her than it was for Sensy or Rash,
or even for some of the olders who were already riding.  She had
stopped talking about it after a few muttered accusations of showing
off.  The only person she shared her progress with now was Granna Fee,
and even she didn't---

*Twinge.* She winced and put her hand on the back of her head.  There
it was again, that feeling of, of---of something, but what?

This time Sensy noticed.  "Are you all right?"

"Sure," Noxy lied.  One of the few things Aft and Grappa Gas agreed on
was that cloudherds shouldn't fly if they were sick, but she wasn't
going to admit anything that might mean being left behind.  "Come on,
let's go."

Grappa Gas made everyone wait until Big Blue was only a couple of
strides below the mounting platform before he let them jump on.  The
three teenagers had been doing it since they were little children, but
the brief moment of flight and *poof!* as they landed still made them
all whoop.  Grappa Gas landed beside them a moment later, and Granna
Fee a moment after that.  "Oof," she grunted, rolling over and sitting
up.  "That's not as soft as it used to be."  But then she smiled like
the girl she had once been and put her arm around Noxy so that her
granddaughter could lean against her the way she had so many times
before.

Behind them, Rash nudged Sensy with his elbow.  "You can lean on me if
you get cold, you know."

Sensy sniffed.  "I don't expect I'll ever get *that* cold."

Granna Fee pressed her hand against Big Blue and closed her eyes.  The
cloud turned obediently and began drifting toward the spiderweb gate
that hung down over mouth of the gorge.  As he moved away from the
platform, Pillow rose to take his place.  Two of Stale's other
oldsters clambered aboard, too stiff or serious to jump.

"I'll take lead," Aft called.

"Yes, I heard you the first time," Granna Fee muttered under her
breath.  She slowed Big Blue so that Pillow could pass.  As she did
so, Aft took the ox horn from his belt and blew three loud notes, low
high low.

Indy blew an answering note from her seat above the cloud pen gate.
"Now comes the hard part," she told Sergeant Dorbu.  He, the tiger,
and the tiger's boy had come with her to see off the rescue party.
Instead of taking them with the others, she had led them up a steep
flight of stairs cut into the rock to a smaller square platform, where
she had seated herself on a sturdy little stool supported by a single
post.  As the clouds approached the gate, she put her feet on the
pedals that stuck out of the post and began pumping.

With a long squeak of protest, the spiderweb gate drew back so that
the clouds could get by.  "Saves us having to re-frib the curtain
every time someone comes in or out," she puffed.  "And it's half the
time."  She paused to wave Pillow and Big Blue's riders as they
drifted out of the pen and turned upwind.

"But twice the work, I'm guessing," Sergeant Dorbu said
sympathetically.  "Want me to wind it back?"

"What?  Oh, no, that's all right."  Indy started pedalling again.
"The exercise keeps me fit."

"Mm," the sergeant said, eyeing her.  When the tiger rumbled deep in
his throat, Sergeant Dorbu put on his most innocent expression.  The
tiger's boy just rolled his eyes.

Cloudherding is cold work, even in the summer.  In the spring, in the
mountains, when breath still fogs and the wind pokes its fingers
through every loose seam and down every collar, it's beyond freezing.
A hundred heartbeats after they left the cloud pen, Granna Fee had
wrapped a fleece around herself and her granddaughter, leaving only
their faces exposed.  Rash and Sensy had done the same---as Sensy
said, he might be a goof, but at least he was a *warm* goof.

Only Grappa Gas seemed unaffected.  "Saints and their inventions, but
I miss this," he sighed.  He'd brought a cushion to rest his wooden
leg on so that it wouldn't poke into Big Blue, but was dressed in the
same long coat and scarf that he had been wearing when the soldiers
arrived.  "Look, the condors are back in their nest!  We should invite
them them to visit some time."

"They're not really the most sociable of creatures," Granna Fee said
dryly.

Grappa Gas harrumphed.  "You just have to get to know them.  I wonder
if any of their chicks will be Gifted this year?  That would be a
thing, wouldn't it?  Oh, and down there, is that---saints, is that a
person down there?"

"Where?"  Noxy pushed the heavy fleece aside and scrambled to the
cloud's leading edge.  "I don't see, where?"

Grappa Gas shook his head.  "Sorry, girl, it was just a troll."  He
patted her shoulder.

"Someone needs to remember to wear his glasses when he's out and
about," Granna Fee sniffed pointedly.  Grappa Gas harrumphed again,
but didn't reply.

It had taken Sergeant Dorbu and his men a day to hike up the pass to
Stale Leftovers.  The Staler cloudherds covered the same distance in
less than half an hour, even with the headwind.  "There," Granna Fee
said, pointing at a thin plume of smoke.

Grappa Gas frowned.  "I thought he said there were just a few of
them."

Granna Fee frowned too.  "Maybe 'a few' means something different to
lowlanders."

The soldiers' makeshift camp sat on a barren pinnacle of rock that
rose like an island out of the forest.  Two dozen drab gray tents
huddled around a small fire.  Shading her eyes with her hand, Noxy saw
a handful of men moving about, some propped against one another to
stay upright.

Grappa Gas gave a low whistle.  "Aft's not going to like this," he
said.

"Neither is my daughter," Granna Fee replied, shaking her head.

One of the injured soldiers spotted the clouds a few minutes later.
The cloudherds were too far away to hear his shouts, but there was no
mistaking the urgency in the way he waved his arms.  Other soldiers
crawled out of their tents and began waving and shouting as well as
Aft steered Pillow in a long arc to the upwind side of the rocky
outcrop.  After a brief discussion that mostly consisted of
interrupting each other, Granna Fee and Grappa Gas had Big Blue hover
directly above the camp.

"You lot keep your eyes wide," Grappa Gas ordered the teenagers
curtly.  "Forest might be happy to have us take them, or it might
not."

Pillow descended until she bumped against the northern edge of the
rock, her upper side level with its top.  The two older cloudherds
riding with Aft stayed on board while he strode forward, barking
orders to hurry the soldiers along.  Only a few wind-borne words
reached Noxy, but that was enough for her to know that he was telling
the injured men to leave their gear, to leave their tents, to leave
everything they couldn't pick up *right away*.

Limping and stumbling in singles and pairs, the men began to clamber
onto Pillow's back.  A few still wore their battle masks, but most had
tied them out of the way on the backs of their helmets.  It made them
look like a doll Noxy had once seen with one happy face and one sad,
except the soldiers faces were fierce and weary.

The older cloudherds helped the worst injured, and had others move
apart to keep their weight balanced.  As they were doing this, one of
the soldiers stopped in front of Aft and began to argue, pointing at a
larger tent set up a short distance away from the others.  Other
soldiers joined in, until Aft was partly surrounded by a half-circle
of angry men.

Finally he threw up his hands in surrender.  Taking the horn from his
belt, he blew two long notes, then windmilled his arm and pointed to
Pillow.

"No no no," Grappa Gas muttered.  "You can take them all, lad, just
get them loaded up and get out of there."

"What?  What's happening?" Noxy asked.

"He wants us to come in behind him and take some of them," Grappa Gas
told her angrily.  "But look---over there!"

Something brown flashed between two trees a dozen strides into the
forest.  Something else---something much larger---briefly let itself
be seen a few strides further away.  In singles and pairs and packs,
the forest was mustering its servants.

Grappa Gas spat over Big Blue's side.  "Forest is holding back for
now," he said.  "But we go in, it'll be on us like an avalanche."

"It's not your decision to make," Granna Fee told him.  "Aft's riding
fore on this one, and---"

"---and you follow your fore.  I know, I know.  Saints."  Grappa Gas
looked like he wanted to spit again, but instead he placed his palm on
Big Blue and closed his eyes.  A moment later the cloud began to
descend.

Granna Fee looked at the three teenagers.  "You shout as soon as you
see anything, you hear me?"

"Yes, granna," Sensy said as Rash and Noxy nodded.

Five heartbeats, ten... They were level with the camp.  Grappa Gas
steered them slowly across the wind toward Pillow's side.  The
soldiers watched them approach without expression, too weak and weary
to be amazed at the sight.  "Hurry it up!" Aft bellowed at the half
dozen who had dragged long canvas-wrapped packages out of the large
tent and were staggering back through camp with them over their
shoulders.  He leaped onto Pillow.  A moment later the cloud lifted
off, clearing space for Big Blue.

The larger cloud touched down with a bump.  An instant later something
roared in the forest behind them.  Noxy jumped.  Sensy shrieked and
Grappa Gas cursed as a brown bear charged out of the trees and halted
a stone's throw away.  It reared up on its hind legs and roared again.
Another bear joined it, then a cougar, and then---

"Oh no," Noxy breathed.  There were trolls in the trees, a dozen, two,
three, a whole troop of them.  They began hooting, shaking the
branches around them until it looked like the entire forest had come
alive.

The first of the soldiers reached them.  He stumbled at the edge of
the rocky outcrop and fell forward onto Big Blue, the package on his
shoulder landing heavily beside him.  The others were right behind
him.  "Come on come on come *on*!" Grappa Gas urged them.

A stone flew through the air, then another.  Suddenly the air was full
of flying rocks.  A soldier staggered and went down as one hit his
head.  Another struck Noxy hard in the back.  She ducked and covered
her head.

"Hang on!" Grappa Gas shouted.  Big Blue surged upward so suddenly
that Noxy was knocked off her feet.

"Look out!" Rash yelled, grabbing Sensy's arm and pulling her back as
the cougar leaped up at them.  The two teens fell together in a heap
on the cloud.  The cougar snarled with disappointment as it missed the
edge of the cloud by a palm's width.

Higher, higher... Noxy let out her breath, only then realizing that
she'd been holding it.  "That was close," she said shakily.

"Too close.  Too *damned* close!"  Grappa Gas rounded on the nearest
soldier.  "We could have been dinner, all of us, and for what?  What
was so aching important you just couldn't leave it behind!?"  He poked
at the long bundle beside the soldier with his cane.

The soldier looked at him bleakly.  "Our mates.  Those as didn't make
it.  We promised we'd give 'em a decent send-off."

Grappa Gas froze, then lowered his cane.  "Ah.  Sorry, lad.  I'm
sorry."

The soldier nodded.  "Me too."  Behind them, the forest's creatures
had already started tearing every man-made thing in the camp to
pieces.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 3: Arguments and Pursuit

They hardly said a word on the way back to Stale.  One of the soldiers
even fell asleep, snoring on one of his companions' shoulders.  The
others watched the mountains go by with only an occasional flicker of
interest.

With her hand on Big Blue's back, Noxy could feel how unhappy the
cloud was.  It wasn't just that he was carrying strangers, or that
those strangers were bleeding and miserable.  When clouds died, they
just spread out into nothing.  The thought that something could end
but still be there---that it could go from being alive to being like a
rock or a log---made the five canvas-wrapped bodies frightening in a
way that storm winds and lightning couldn't match.

*Sh, sh, sh,* Noxy mind-spoke soothingly, stroking the cloud as if he
was an overgrown house cat.  *Home soon, then rest.* At that moment,
she wanted it just as much as the skittish cloud.

Aft brought Pillow down in a clearing in front of the village's main
gate.  It hadn't been cut back since the previous autumn, but only a
few ferns and flowers stuck up out of the rocky soil.  The soldiers he
had picked up slid off the cloud in ones and twos.  Some managed to
keep their feet under themselves, but others stumbled onto one knee or
landed on their backsides.  Under normal circumstances, the villagers
would have made jokes or applauded particularly clumsy dismounts.
There was no joking this time, though.  Instead, people came forward
to offer them men blankets and fleeces, or helped them stand and then
stepped back, unsure what to do next.

Indy didn't let the Stalers stand idle for long---she never did.  "Get
these ones up to the traders' hall," she ordered one group crisply.
"And get a couple of pots of stew going---and some tea.  You do drink
tea, don't you?"  She moved on without waiting for an answer.

Sergeant Dorbu was there as well.  He had traded his helmet for a
knitted cap, black with a pair of yellow stripes to match those on his
sleeves, but still wore his armor.  He clapped one man on the
shoulder, steadied a second leaning on a makeshift crutch, and bowed
his head when a third told him who hadn't made it through the night.

"Where's the tiger?" Rash asked, shading his eyes with his hand.

"Up on the wall," Sensy said, pointing.

Noxy shaded her own eyes.  Kulbinder was sitting on his hindquarters
high above the crowd with his boy beside him.  Suddenly the tiger
raised his head and looked straight at them---straight at *her*.  She
shivered with more than just the cold.

As the last soldier exchanged a salute with Sergeant Dorbu, Aft blew a
long note on his signal horn.  Pillow lifted off a moment later and
turned toward the cloud pen.

"Back up, you lot," Grappa Gas ordered.  "I'm going to bring this one
down."  He gave the three teenagers a moment, then closed his eyes and
ordered Big Blue down.

They bumped once as they landed.  "Whoops," Grappa Gas muttered,
coloring slightly at the look Granna Fee gave him.  "All right.  What
do you say we get this done and go find something warm to drink?"

It took a few moments for the soldiers to slide the bodies they had
brought down the cloud's flank into their waiting comrades' arms.
When a couple of villagers offered to help, Sergeant Dorbu shook his
head politely but firmly.  "These are ours," he said firmly.  "Though
we'd be grateful if you could gather some wood for a pyre---we'd like
to send them off tonight."

And then suddenly it was over.  Noxy found herself standing next to
her friends, both feet on the ground, watching Grappa Gas and Granna
Fee lift off to take Big Blue back to the cloud pen.  A handful of
Stalers were milling about, but the soldiers and everyone else was
already back inside the walls.  Even the tiger and his boy had
disappeared off the wall.

"Well," Noxy said awkwardly, not sure what to do next.  "I guess I'll
go see if my *amma* has any chores for me."

"If she doesn't, you can do some of mine," Rash replied, as he had a
hundred times before.  He glanced at Sensy.  "I guess we should to be
useful too."

"I guess," she said casually.  "See you later."

"You too."  Whatever else Noxy might have said was cut off by a
now-familiar twinge in the back of her head.  A heartbeat later she
head the staccato blatting of Aft's horn, the quick, angry pattern
that meant 'back away and give me some room'.  She caught her breath.
She had *known* one of the clouds was upset even before she'd heard
the horn---but how?

&HERE

Her mother was still organizing people in the square.  Yes, the
soldiers would stay in the trading hall, she'd already said that.
Yes, the wounded---where else would they go?  And yes, there *were* a
lot more than 'a few' of them, but there was nothing they could do
about that now.

Indy caught sight of her daughter.  "It will have to wait, daffodil,"
she said as Noxy opened her mouth.  "Right now I want you to go home
and make some tea.  Use the big pot, and all the honey we have left.
I have the feeling we're going to have lots of visitors..."

The water hadn't even boiled before Grappa Gas showed up.  He rapped
on the door with his cane and entered without waiting for a hello.
"Hey, lass.  Where's your mother?"

"She should be back soon," Noxy said.  She added a handful of tea
leaves to the cinnamon bark and green cardamom pods already in the
pot.  It was an extravagance---the pack traders who brought such
delicacies to the village wouldn't start visiting until the last of
the snow had melted, which was at least another month away---but
Granna Fee had always said that a good cup of tea was worth a thousand
words.

"Mind if I sit?" Grappa Gas settled himself on a stool that was at
least as old as he was and watched Noxy drizzle the last of the honey
into the pot.

"What did you find out?" Noxy asked after a moment.

The old man snorted.  "Just like your mother, aren't you? And your
granna, too.  Always thinking one step ahead of everyone else." He
smiled.  "You know, if your granna hadn't been so smart, I might've
wound up being your grappa.  I remember once when---"

"Grappa!" Noxy cut him off, exasperated and amused at the same time.
"Tell me what the soldiers said!"

"And how do you know they said anything?" Grappa Gas challenged her.

"Because they're a long way from home, and tired, and sore, and want
us all to like them," Indy answered, closing the front door behind her
as she came in.  "And because I saw you duck into the trading hall on
your way down from the cloud pen.  Now, what did you find out?" She
kissed the old man on his grizzled cheek and sat on the other stool.

For a moment all Grappa Gas could think of was how alike mother and
daughter were.  Noxy's hair might be brown and wavy instead of
straight and black, and her face square instead of round, but they had
the same quick minds.  When Indy had turned ten, he had predicted that
she would be mayor before she was thirty.  *Better start telling
everyone that Noxy's going to take the job too,* he thought.

"The king's men hit them while they were crossing the ford near Tastes
Like Duck Droppings," he told Indy.  "Just bad luck, but they were
split between the two sides of the river when they were attacked."
His face darkened.  "Fellow I spoke to said the king's troops must
have had a magician with them, because their tiger didn't catch wind
of them until it was too late.  He doesn't expect expect he'll see
many of his friends again."

Indy glanced at Noxy.  "This doesn't go out of this house," she
warned.  Noxy nodded, turning to the stove as the lid on the kettle
began to whistle.  She lifted it carefully with a pair of sticks to
pour the boiling water into the tea, then replaced it on the stove and
set the teapot on the table to steep.

"Was there anything else?" Indy asked.

Grappa Gas frowned.  "They didn't say it, but King Denpa's winning.
And about time, too---he's got help now from half his neighbors, all
worried that Shudarga's craziness might be contagious.  If you ask
me---"

The front door banged open.  Aft strode in and glared at Indy.  "How
soon are they leaving?" he demanded.

"Well, good day to you too," Grappa Gas muttered.

Aft ignored his father.  "How soon, Indy? You know you can't let them
stay."

Indy stood up slowly.  "Make yourself comfortable," she said,
gesturing at her stool.  "Noxy, go get the peeling stool from out
back.  Brush it off before you bring it in the house."

Aft glowered at Indy a moment longer, then sat down opposite his
father.  The short stool creaked in protest under his weight.  Noxy
set down the peeling stool she had fetched for her mother, then began
pouring tea as inconspicuously as she could while Aft counted off the
reasons the rebels couldn't stay.  What if the king sent an army after
them? Wait, what did he mean "if", of course he would.  There were
only three hundred people in Stale, and only half a dozen of them had
ever held a sword.  Not that they *had* any swords.  And even if they
had---

"I'm surprised to hear you say all this," Indy interrupted.  "I
thought if anyone would take their side, it would be you."

"Well, yes, of course I do," Aft blustered.  "The sooner leeches like
the *tralpa* have to start earning an honest living like the rest of
us, the better.  But---"

"But it's different when someone's actually on your doorstep, isn't
it?"  Grappa Gas shook his head pityingly.

Aft clenched his hands into fists.  "Of course it's different.  The
baby could come any day now.  If the king's men come looking for this
lot--- if there's a fight---"

"Enough!"  Indy slapped the table with her hand.  "Enough, both of
you.  We have a stormload of trouble to fly through, and I will *not*
have you two making it worse with your bickering."

Noxy set a steaming mug of tea in front of her and two others in front
of Grappa Gas and his son.  Indy stared into hers as if hoping the
tiny swirling leaves might spell out some answers.  "I know it's a big
thing," she went on quietly.  "And I did think about turning them
away, but look at them.  They look like they've been through the
Blight.  If a storm caught them in the pass, they wouldn't even make
it as far as Makes Your Breath Rancid.  How would that make us look?"

Aft scowled.  "What people think won't matter much if we've all had
our throats cut.  No, wait, hear me out."  He slurped his tea and set
the cup down with a clatter.  "What we just did, saving travellers who
got caught on the mountain, we can explain that if we have to.  But
letting them stay here---saints and all their gifts, Indy, we can't.
We just can't.  It wouldn't be safe."

"For once, I agree with you."  Grappa Gas slurped his own tea with a
scowl.  "Never mind the trouble it'll bring when the king wins---yes,
I said *when*, and you know as well as I do that's what's going to
happen---never mind the trouble, it's three dozen mouths to feed when
we're already down to dried apples and barley."

Aft snorted.  "Never mind the tiger.  What are we supposed to feed it?
Or should I ask 'who'?"

"Disgusting Aftertaste!" Indy snapped.  "I will *not* have that kind
of talk about one of the Gifted.  Especially not in front of my
daughter."

"Hmph!" Aft snorted.  "All I can say is, let's hope there isn't a late
storm, because if there is, *I'm* going to be keeping *my* family
behind a good strong door." He swallowed the rest of his tea in one
gulp, stood, and nodded a curt goodbye to Noxy, and slammed the door
as he left.

"Maybe it wouldn't be such a bad thing if you were right!" Grappa Gas
called out.  "Maybe we'd have some peace and quiet around here if a
few of us *did* get eaten!"  He turned back to Indy.  "Don't worry
about him---he's just worried about the baby."

"I know," Indy smiled.  "But I appreciate you saying it."

Grappa Gas drained the last of his tea in one long gulp.  "It's good,"
he said to Noxy.  "Maybe wants more cinnamon next time, though."

"I'll try to remember," Noxy promised.

Indy stood when Grappa Gas did.  "Will you stay for dinner?"

He shook his head.  "Thanks, girl, but I promised your mother I'd help
her, um, peel some potatoes."  He winked, ignoring Noxy's little 'eww'
of disgust.  Indy smiled and kissed him on the cheek again.  He was
humming as he left.

Noxy waited until her mother said down again before saying,
"*Amma*...?"

"Yes, daffodil?"

Noxy hesitated.  She didn't know where to start.  "Do you think the
king really is going to come looking for them?"

Indy sighed.  "I hope not.  But what I really hope is that they aren't
here long enough for us to have to worry about that."

When Princess Shudarga had marched on the capital the previous summer,
Grappa Gas had demanded that the cloudherds do their best to drown her
troops.  Aft had argued just as loudly that they should support the
rebellion.  After all, what had the king's *tralpa* done for them
except take half of what they brought home at the end of every summer
and tell them they couldn't build a bigger fishpond?  As the arguments
grew more heated, Indy had put on her collar, called everyone
together, and laid down the law.  This was the lowlanders' fight. The
people of Stale Leftovers were *not* going to take either side, not
while she was mayor, and if anyone didn't like it, they could have an
election right then and there to sort it out.  Anyone?  No?  All
right, then, why didn't everyone get back to their chores, because
they weren't going to do themselves.

The two sat in silence for a moment.  Finally Indy stretched.  "So
tell me, did you collect some spiderwebs, or did you and Sensy spend
the whole day mooning after Rash?"

"*Amma*! And how can you think about spiderwebs on a day like this?
And anyway, Sensy's the one who's mooning after Rash and that stupid
moustache he's trying to grow.  *I* think it's dumb."

"If you say so."  Indy raised her arms and stretched.  "Now, what are
we---"

*Crash!* Mother and daughter jumped as something landed on the roof
above their heads, sending tiles skittering down to shatter on the
cobblestones outside.  A low, menacing yowl sent ice up Noxy's spine.

"What in the names...?"  Indy crossed the floor in three steps and
threw open the door just in time to see a troll land in the narrow
street in front of their house.  She yelped and flung herself to the
side as the hairy creature lunged past her and raced up the stairs on
all fours.

The tiger hit the cobblestones a heartbeat later.  "Which way did it
go?" he demanded, his ears back and his tail lashing.

The sound of a window shutter being flung open upstairs answered his
question before Indy could.  "Wait, stop!"  She held up a hand before
the tiger could move.  "What in the saints' names are you *doing*?"

"He was spying on us!" the tiger snarled.  "Now let me pass!"

"No!"  As the tiger came forward, Indy stepped into the doorway to
block him.

He pulled up short with a snarl.  "I said *let me pass!*"

"And I said *no!*" The mayor of Stale glared at the cat, her eyes
flashing with the same angry light that lit his.  "This is *our*
village, and you will *not* race around like a madman unless *I* say
so, is that clear?"

It was the bravest thing Noxy had ever seen her mother do, and for one
long moment, she was sure it would be the last.  The muscles in the
tiger's shoulders bunched.  He braced his legs to charge---and then,
just as suddenly, relaxed.

"As you say," he growled, his tail still twitching.  "But I still want
to know who that damn chimpanzee was spying for."

"We call them 'trolls' here," Indy said, her voice still full of
steel.  "They're our neighbors.  And I imagine he was doing what any
neighbor would do if a bunch of strangers showed up next door---having
a look to see what's going on."

"There was a troll up by the spiderweb orchard this morning," Noxy
said, immediately wishing she hadn't when two heads turned to stare at
her.  "Sensy and I---we saw it when were coming back down."

"How come you didn't tell me?" her mother demanded.

"It's been kind of busy!" Noxy said defensively.  "Anyway, it wasn't
the same one.  It was older.  A lot older."

The tiger sat on his haunches.  "Is this normal here?
Chimp---*trolls* coming this close to a human settlement?  Because
they very much keep to themselves in Thind."

"No, it's not normal," Indy said.  She uncrossed her arms and
gestured.  "But if we're going to talk about it, would you like to
come in?"

The tiger regarded her coolly for a moment, then blinked and looked
away.  "Thank you," he said, his voice calm once again.  "Perhaps some
other time.  I should see if the sergeant needs me."  And without any
more goodbye than that, he rose and loped away.

Noxy let out her breath in a long whoosh.  "Well," she said shakily.
"That wasn't scary at all."

Her mother sat back down on her stool and squeezed her daughter's
hand.  "Hardly at all," she agreed.  "Are you all right?"

Noxy nodded.  "Sure," she lied.

Indy squeezed her hand again, then got up to close the door.  "Good.
Let's scramble some eggs and call it a day."  She took down their one
frying pan and set it on the stove beside the kettle.  "Tomorrow, I'm
going to see if I can get to know the sergeant a little better.  And I
think you ought to get to know the tiger's boy.  Let's see if we can
find out if they have any other surprises tucked away."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 4: Getting To Know You

"Oh Noxy, brush your hair!" Indy set her tea down on the table and
began to stand.

"I can do it," Noxy protested. "I'm not a baby." She dragged the brush
she and her mother shared through her hair another few times. "Is that
better?"

Her mother sighed, just as her own mother once had. "Yes, I suppose.
Honestly, someone would think you'd been possessed by lightning.  Now
let's get going.  We don't want to keep them waiting."

They walked through the village together, squinting against the
sharp-edged morning sun.  The air smelled of pine smoke and fried
eggs.  People were sitting in twos and threes on stools outside their
houses wearing goofskin jackets or thick sweaters above sturdy
trousers and sturdier boots.  The men knitted or peeled potatoes while
the women picked spiderwebs apart apart and wound the strands onto
spools.

Indy had to stop to answer the same questions every dozen strides.
How were the soldiers getting on? What did they think of the village?
"We're on our way to ask," she replied over and over again.

Many of the village's elders didn't bother to hide their unhappiness
about their guests, but the only really sour face was Aft's.  "Has
that tiger eaten anyone yet?" he asked, forcing an awl through a scrap
of leather.  "Or is he too busy racing around on rooftops?"

Noxy felt nearly frantic with impatience by the time she and her
mother reached the trading hall where the soldiers had spent the
night.  She knew that talking to people was the most important part of
being mayor, and her mother liked doing it anyway, but what if someone
else was already showing the tiger's boy around the village?

She needn't have worried.  Sergeant Dorbu was sitting on the
guesthouse steps with the village's children cross-legged on the
stones in front of him.  Sensy and Rash looked up as Noxy arrived.
Noxy blinked.  Had they been holding hands?

"And this is called a greave," the sergeant said, pointing at the
armored front of his boot.  "It's to protect me from vampire mice.
See?" He tapped it with his fingernail, *clunk*.  "They could bite
that if they wanted, but all they'd do is blunt their teeth."

"What if they climbed up your leg?" asked Sensy.  Noxy rolled her
eyes.  Sensy could always be counted on to ask the questions grownups
wanted to hear.

"Ah, well, then I'd---oh, hello, mayor." The sergeant stood up,
brushing his hands on his kilt.  "The boy will be out in a heartbeat."

"Thank you, sergeant," said Indy.  "My daughter is looking forward to
showing him the village.  I trust you slept well?"

"Yes, thank you," said the sergeant.  "Although I..." He blinked, then
sniffed, then started to say, "Excuse me," but the sneeze came first.
*Hwah!* One of the younger children giggled, then clapped her hand
over her mouth.  The sergeant blinked and sniffed again.  "Sorry---too
many nights in the rain."

"Visitors from down below often catch colds in our thin air," said
Indy sympathetically.  "I hope it passes quickly."

The guesthouse door opened before the sergeant could reply.  The
children scrambled to their feet and stepped back as the tiger padded
out into the sunlight.  He wasn't as big as he'd been in Noxy's
troubled dreams during the night, but she still had to stop herself
from reaching for her mother's hand.

Almost unnoticed, his boy slipped out behind him and closed the door.
Instead of his armor, he wore a plain brown rain cape over his kilt
and boots.  He kept his eyes downcast as the tiger said, "Good
morning, mayor."

"Good morning, respected," Indy replied.  "I trust you slept well?"

"Thank you, I did." The tiger seemed not to notice that thirty pairs
of eyes were staring at him.  *He must be used to it,* Noxy thought.

Indy waited a moment to see if he would say anything more.  When he
didn't, she smiled and said, "My daughter has asked if you could spare
your boy for an hour so that she could show him our village while the
other children do their chores."  Noxy heard Rash mutter something at
that.  "If he would like to---oh dear." She stopped mid-sentence as
the sergeant took a deep breath and scrunched up his face.  "Nope," he
whooshed a moment later, blinking.  "That one's not ripe yet."

"You'd be better in bed than tramping around the countryside,
sergeant," Kulbinder rumbled.

"I agree," said Indy firmly.  "My mother will make you some lemon
ginger tea.  That will set you right in no time."

"Thang you," the sergeant said stuffily.  "Respected, will you---"

"I am going to explore the forest," the tiger declared.  "I would
rather we were not...surprised...as we were at the ford."  And with no
more ceremony than that, the tiger stood, stretched, and padded off
toward the main gate.

Indy clapped her hands.  "Right.  Everyone else, time for chores."  As
the children groaned and got to their feet, the tiger's boy finally
raised his eyes to look at Noxy.

"Hello," he said, stepping down to the cobblestones and bowing ever so
slightly.  "My name is Thokmay.  I'm pleased to meet you."

Noxy stuck out her hand.  "Hi.  I'm Probably Noxious, but call me
Noxy---everyone does."

The boy hesitated for a heartbeat, then took her hand in a grip much
stronger than Noxy had expected.  She was just as surprised to feel
the calluses on his hands.  He released her hand and gestured toward
the gate.  "After you."

Noxy and the tiger's boy walked side by side.  "That's the South
Tower," said Noxy, pointing at six rectangular stories of stone.  "It
still has a roof, but the stairs inside fell down a long time ago.
You used to be able to get up there by climbing a tree, but they cut
it down after Grappa Gas fell out of it for the second time.  That was
before I was born.  And that one's the Round Tower, and the short one
over there is called the Quick Tower, because it's quickest to get
up."

"It's a shame they've been allowed to go to ruin," said Thokmay.
"Princess Shudarga's engineers work year round to keep the walls of
Panday Castle sturdy.  Perhaps when the war is over she could send
some here to fix them."

"That would be nice," Noxy replied vaguely.  She wondered how Grappa
Gas would feel about having rebel engineers clambering around the
village's wall.  "Oh, and that's Granna Fee's house, with the moss
green door.  She's my grandmother.  And she teaches school.  And
that's Grappa Gas's house, the lavender one.  He used to be mayor.
And that's, um, well, they're all just different people's houses."

Noxy fell silent.  Thokmay had a polite but absent look on his face,
just like the one Indy got when Grappa Gas started talking about how
things had been in his day.  *It's probably not much compared to a
real castle,* she thought glumly.  Two-story houses with steep
shingled roofs, little vegetable gardens nestled between logs laid
parallel a stride apart, and all around, sharp mountain peaks looming
over the ancient gray walls...  She wouldn't have believed how strange
it all seemed to the young lowlander beside her.

They walked in silence along the path that ran next to the walls.
Ancient cobblestones showed through the hard-packed dirt in a few
places.  Noxy scuffed crusts of frost off a few absentmindedly,
wondering what else she could say.

Suddenly Thokmay stopped.  "What is that?" he asked.  A heavy wooden
grill lay across a shoulder-high opening in the wall ahead of them.
Behind it, rough stone steps led down into the mountain.

"That's just some old tunnels," said Noxy.  "We're not supposed to go
in."

Thokmay scowled.  "Sergeant Dorbu will want to know about them."

"Why?" Noxy asked.  "Most of them are flooded.  Except for the one
under Grappa Gas's house, and the ones by the drying sheds.  We use
them for cellars."

"Soldiers should know as much as they can about their surroundings,"
Thokmay said, as if repeating a lesson to a slow learner.

Noxy bit back a sharp retort.  "Come on," she said, hurrying ahead.
"We can see more from up top."

The steps lay flush against the side of the wall.  They had been built
for the Pilots, not for human beings, so each one was as high as
Noxy's knee, and so broad that it took her two strides to cross.

Noxy put her left hand on the wall to steady herself each time she
thrust herself up a stair.  Even after hundreds of years, the stones
fit together so snugly that it was hard to tell where one ended and
the next began.  She noticed smugly that Thokmay was puffing and
sweating after only a few steps.

The top of the wall was wide enough for three soldiers to march side
by side.  The parapet along its outer edge was interrupted here and
there by slits for lookouts and archers.  "Makes Your Breath Rancid is
that way," Noxy said, pointing.  "You can't see it because the valley
bends, but sometimes you can see their clouds coming out of their
pen."

"Why do you call your villages things like that?" the young soldier
asked.

Noxy shrugged.  "They're called dragon names.  They're supposed to
make things sound unappetizing, so that when the dragons finally fly,
they'll think twice about eating us."

Thokmay snorted.  "That seems pretty far-fetched."

"Well, where does *your* name come from??" Noxy bristled.

"From the army orphanage," he replied, not looking at her.  "I had
another name before I went there, but they gave me a new one."

Noxy opened her mouth, then closed it.  For once, she had no idea what
to say.

As she was trying to think of something, Thokmay leaned through one of
the slits in the parapet and pointed into the gorge below them.  "Are
those the clouds we were on?"

Noxy glanced through the neighboring slit.  "Yup.  The bull is Big
Blue, and the cow is Pillow.  We've had them forever---they're
practically tame."

The two old clouds were hardly moving, but Noxy could have watched
them for hours.  She loved the way they slowly changed shape as they
drifted about, and how soft they felt when she stroked them.  Being up
in the sky on a cloud was like riding on a grownup's shoulders when
you were little, only a thousand times better.  You could see
everything---deer grazing beneath the twisted pines, mountain goofs
standing on rocky ledges no wider than the heel of your boot,
broad-winged condors making slow circles as they waited for a rabbit
to forget to look up...  When the air was still, and the cloud was
just drifting, it felt like the whole world was a story that was about
to be told for the very first time.

Thokmay stepped back and wrinkled his nose.  "They smell like wet
sheep."

"That's because they haven't rained for a while," Noxy explained
defensively.  "Rash and I will probably take them out tomorrow and let
them rain over the fishpond.  Here, come with me."

Descending the stairs was even harder on her knees than climbing them.
Rather than cutting directly through the village, she led Thokmay on a
roundabout path through the vegetable plots around its edges.  She'd
seen the looks Sensy and Rash had given her when her mother had sent
them off to do chores while she showed their youngest visitor around,
and she wasn't keen to bump into them until they'd had a chance to
cool off.

Once through the gate, she up the trail to the cloud pen.  Big Blue
and Pillow were both floating fifty strides away in the middle of the
gorge.  The bull was almost at their height, while the cow drifted
further down in his shadow.

"Can you call them over?" Thokmay asked.

Noxy shook her head.  "You have to be touching them to mind-speak with
them.  That's what the ropes and cradle seat are for---see?  If
they're not close enough to the edge, someone has to be reeled out
above them so they can jump on from there.  It's pretty dangerous,"
she added airily.

"I suppose," Thokmay said.  He wrinkled his nose.  "But I still think
they smell like wet sheep."

Noxy bit back an angry retort.  They didn't smell anything *like*
sheep, not really, and if he wasn't smart enough to---

*Twinge.* "Ouch," she muttered, putting her hand on the back of her
head.  The pain was strong enough this time that she thought there
would be a lump, but she couldn't feel anything.

"Is everything all right?" Thokmay asked, eyeing her.

"Yes, it's fine," she snapped.  She closed her eyes.  She had hoped
the clouds would be right next to the mounting platform so that he
could stroke one.  Or even get on, though she knew what her mother
would say about *that* if she found out.  Like a thousand cloudherds
before her, she wished the clouds would come when she whistled like
the goofs did.

"Um...  Are they supposed to be doing that?"  She opened her eyes at
Thokmay's words to see Big Blue turning toward them.  Below him,
Pillow was rising as quickly as Noxy had ever seen her move.

Thokmay stepped back instinctively as Big Blue bumped against the
mounting platform.  Noxy stroked the old bull's flank.  "See?" she
said.  "You can pull bits of them this way and that, but it all
settles back into a big lump after a while."  She grabbed a handful of
Big Blue's side and pulled as hard as she could.  When she let go, the
bit she had teased out slowly sank back into the cloud.

The young soldier patted the cloud gingerly.  Noxy grinned wickedly.
"Here, do this."  She backed up, then ran at the cloud and threw
herself up onto his back.  *Poof!* "Come on!" she said when Thokmay
hesitated.  "He won't bite."

"Noxious Aftertaste!  What do you think you're doing?"  Noxy's heart
leaped into her throat.  There, at the top of the steps that led down
to the platform, stood her mother and Sergeant Dorbu.  "You get off
that cloud *right now*, young lady!"

Noxy's stomach was churning by the time they reached the fortress
gate.  Her mother hadn't said a word to her on the walk back.  "Thank
you for the tour," Thokmay said politely, putting out his hand.

"You're welcome," Noxy mumbled.  She shook his hand and then waited
for the storm she knew was coming.

"And thank you as well," Sergeant Dorbu told Indy, smiling.  "It was a
pleasure."

"You're welcome," the mayor said.  If she had been anyone but Noxy's
mother, Noxy would have said she was blushing slightly.

As the sergeant walked away with Thokmay beside him, Indy rounded on
her daughter.  "Tell me," she said coldly, "What exactly would you
have done if he'd slipped off the cloud?"

"He wouldn't have slipped off!" Noxy protested.  "It was Big
Blue---he's as safe as---"

"I don't care if it was Big Blue or the mattress on your bed!" Indy
said angrily.  She didn't seem to care that half a dozen people were
listening just a few strides away.  "Do you know what the soldiers are
doing this afternoon?  Do you?  They're settling all their friends who
died before we could get to them.  What do you think they'd say if we
had to tell them there was one more to settle, just because you wanted
to show off?"

"Yes, mayor," Noxy said wretchedly.

"Don't you 'yes, mayor' me.  Now, Eyesie gave us some thimbleberries
for those old boots you'd outgrown.  I want you to get the seeds out
so that I can make a pie for dinner."

"Thimbleberries?" Noxy said in despair.  "That'll take forever!  Rash
and Sensy and I were going to---"

"Well, you should have thought of that, shouldn't you?"  Indy took
Noxy by the shoulders, wondering yet again when her daughter had grown
so tall.  "Daffodil, listen to me.  *Really* listen to me." She combed
her daughter's hair off her forehead with her fingers.  "Half the
village is already muttering about it being time for a new mayor.  How
can I ask them to behave when my own daughter won't? Now, go get
washed up and start on those thimbleberries."

Noxy nodded glumly.  "Yes, *amma*."

She moped home to collect the bucket full of hard red thimbleberries
and a large bowl, then climbed the steps to the top of the Quick
Tower.  She and Sensy had covered a tumbled-down block of stone with a
bit of gray canvas to make a pretend cloud the year before.  Plopping
herself down on it, she started squeezing bitter grain-sized seeds out
of the thimbleberries one by one.  Why did she have to be the one to
show him around?  Why couldn't the stupid soldiers have washed up
somewhere else?  And why did the sun have to be so...so sunny?

When she heard the first shouts from the main square she ignored them,
thinking that it was just children playing jump-sticks or *kabbadi*.
Then she heard Sergeant Dorbu shout, "Hah! Heeeyah!" She tossed
another berry into the bowl and stood up on her stone seat to look.

She was just in time to see Thokmay duck under the sergeant's
out-thrust sword and lunge with his own blade as he straightened up,
shouting "Hah!" in turn.  Every child in the village was gathered
around watching, and not a few of the adults as well.

The sergeant knocked Thokmay's blade away and spun around, slashing
left and right, one, two, three, as if he was fighting an invisible
opponent.  While his back was turned the young soldier stepped forward
and stabbed the sergeant in the ribs.

The sergeant groaned, pinning Thokmay's sword with his arm so that it
was pulled out of the boy's grip as Dorbu turned.  Thokmay only had
time to open his mouth before the sergeant's sword tapped him lightly
in the chest.  To Noxy's disgust, the children started to clap.

"You must keep your grip even after you strike," Kulbinder grumbled.
"No point giving your man one last blow."

"I know," said Thokmay, panting slightly.  "I forgot." The sergeant
handed his sword back to him.  both his blade and the sergeant's were
wrapped in leather so that they wouldn't cut.  They were smaller than
Noxy had imagined: each was only as long as its owner's arm, and no
thicker than a pottery plate.

Thokmay and the sergeant brought their swords up slowly, touched
blades with one another, and started fighting again.  Thokmay lost
quickly this time, but won the third round when the sergeant pretended
to stumble over a loose cobblestone.

They practiced for almost half an hour.  While the children clapped
and cheered, some of the older villagers shook their heads and swapped
disapproving looks.  Still, they kept watching.

By the time the sergeant and his young opponent stopped, they were
both soaked with sweat.  They saluted each other one last time.
"You're getting better every day," Sergeant Dorbu said.  "But we could
both use a wash-up."

Thokmay nodded, still breathing hard.  "Smells like we could both use
one too," he said.  For the first time, Noxy saw him smile.

"Show me, show me!" shouted Little Gas.  He clapped his hands with
excitement.  "I want to play!"

Thokmay's smile froze.  He glanced at the sergeant, who shook his head
almost imperceptibly.  "I'm glad you liked it," the young soldier said
to Little Gas.  His clear voice carried right across the village
square.  "But it's not really a game."

He squatted so that he was no taller than Little Gas.  "But I can show
you something else if you like," he said.  He looked left then right,
as if to make sure no spies or grownups were listening.

"Do you have any spare socks at home?" he asked.  Little Gas nodded.
"Good.  You go and get me three pairs of socks, quick as you can, and
three stones the size of your thumb."

Little Gas bit his lip.  "I only have just one other pair of socks,"
he said.  "They're for when it's winter, so my feet will fit in my
boots."

Thokmay's mouth opened, and closed, and opened again.  "Well," he
said, "Do you think your mother would let you borrow some?  Just for a
little bit?" Little Gas nodded quickly and scurried away.

"Do you want the rest of us to get some socks, too?" Sensy asked
hopefully.  She and Rash had been standing with the younger children,
their chores either done or conveniently forgotten.

"Oh, Sensy!" Noxy said under her breath.

"If you like," Thokmay said, straightening up.  Sensy spun around and
sprinted away.  A handful of other children ran off as well.

Little Gas came puffing back a moment later.  In his hands he had one
pair of green socks, one pair of gray, and one pair with red and white
stripes on them.  "Will these do?" he asked, fishing some stones out
of his pocket.

"They look fine," said Thokmay.  "Now, give me your stones...  Good.
Now, the first thing we do is we roll up the socks like this, with a
stone in the middle, to make a ball.  See? And then the next pair...
And the next...  Now, are you ready?" Little Gas nodded.

Thokmay stepped back, took a deep breath, and threw the balled-up
socks into the air.  His hands darted back and forth like
hummingbirds.  Somehow, he managed to catch each sock ball before it
fell to the ground, and then throw it again in time to catch the next
one.  He caught them overhand, he caught them underhand, he threw two
with his left hand while bouncing the third with his right, and then
he threw them all in the air at once and caught them, one, two, three.

There was a moment of stunned silence.  "That's magic!" Rash said
accusingly.  "You're doing magic!"

"It's not magic," Grappa Gas laughed, looking as delighted as any of
the children.  "It's called 'juggling'! I saw it in Chaghan once,
years ago.  It's just a trick."

"That's right," Thokmay agreed, "It's just a trick.  Here, I'll prove
it.  Sergeant?"

Sergeant Dorbu took the brightly colored sock balls and tossed them in
the air, one, two, three.  He whistled a happy little tune as he
juggled, and even managed to wink at Sensy (who blushed).  By the time
he was finished, Little Gas was laughing and clapping his hands.  "Let
me, let me!" he shrieked.  "I want to!"

"All right, but you have to let me show you how," Thokmay said.  "You
have to start with just two, like this.  Um, Sergeant? Could you show
the older children how it's done? Thank you.  Now, put this one in
this hand, and this one in the other, and..."

Noxy watched Little Gas drop all three pairs of socks, pick them up,
and drop them again.  The little boy laughed.  Seething, she sat back
down on her pretend cloud and glared at the bowl of thimbleberries.
It was going to be a long day...

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 5: Swimming

Noxy was still on her make-believe cloud an hour later, squeezing
seeds out of thimbleberries so angrily it was amazing the the bucket
didn't take fright and try to run away.  Sensy pretended not to notice
as she plopped herself down beside her friend.  "You should have tried
it!" she burbled.  "I only got them all up a few times, but it was so
much fun! Rash could do it almost right away."

"I'm sure it was wonderful," Noxy grumbled.

Sensy pouted.  "Don't be such a goof."

"I'm not being a goof!  I just think he was showing off.  What did
Rash think about him putting his arms around you like that?" The last
time Noxy had looked at the juggling, Thokmay had been standing right
behind Sensy, reaching around to hold her arms just below the elbows.

Sensy brushed her hair back over her ear and grinned.  "Why should I
care what Rash thinks?" she asked sweetly.  Her grin turned into a
leer.  "Or maybe you're the one who cares?"

"Well, *I* think it was embarrassing," Noxy said primly.  "You were
all following him around like ducklings, just because he knew a stupid
trick."

"Well, at least he didn't make everyone say please nine times, like
you did when I wanted to play with the whirlidoodle Granna Fee got you
for your nameday last year!"

Noxy's mouth fell open.  Sensy had never talked back to her before!

The same thought must have occurred to Sensy.  She looked down at the
bucket by Noxy's feet.  "Wow, you've got a lot done."

"Not enough.  Here." She nudged the bucket with her foot.  "If you
want to gossip, you might as well help."

Sensy brushed her hair back over her ear.  "I wasn't gossiping!  I
just came up to tell you that we're going to teach him how to play
Snakes and Whistles."

"Snakes and Whistles? He must know how to play that!"

"Nuh uh.  We were talking about it while we were juggling, and he said
he'd never even heard of it.  I guess they play different games down
below."

"I guess," Noxy echoed dubiously.  She pursed her lips, then stood up
abruptly.  "Well? What are we waiting for? Let's go show him."

By unspoken agreement, Noxy and Sensy didn't go through the main
square---there was no point drawing anyone's attention to the fact
that Noxy had set her chores aside.  Instead, they picked their way
through the stakes and strings in the village pepper garden, held
their breaths as they snuck past the tannery, and slipped out of the
fortress gate as quietly as shadows.

They reached the clearing where the other children had gathered just
as Rash finished explaining the rules to Thokmay.  "But if you can run
all the way back without getting whistled again, then you're safe," he
said.  "I think that's everything."

"What's out of bounds?" someone asked.

"The heather bush, the ponderosa, the lizard rock, and that pile of
earcones," Rash said, pointing at each landmark in turn.

"Did you tell him about not making two snakes at once?" Noxy asked.

Everyone groaned.  "Oh, we're not going to play like that, are we?"
Sensy pouted.  "It takes forever! Anyway, who's going to be leads?"

"You do one team with Thokmay," Noxy said immediately.  "Rash can be
with me.  Everyone else, pick a side!"

The first game only lasted a few minutes.  Thokmay ran straight for
the middle of the field and was whistled almost at once.  Noxy
whistled Sensy a moment later while she was trying to explain what had
happened.  After that, her team couldn't get more than two or three
children into a snake before being whistled by someone from Noxy's
team.

Then Noxy and her team were the snakes, and the tables were turned.
Thokmay swooped down on people like a hawk on a rabbit.  He whistled
three children in as many breaths, then doubled back and whistled Noxy
before she finished saying, "Hey!"

They played until only Rash and Thokmay were left.  Rash feinted left,
then tried to run right, but Thokmay matched him step for step.  The
other children cheered him on, shouting, "Back up!  Come on, Rash!
Make a hoop!" but he just couldn't find an opening.

Rash feinted left again, hesitated for half a heartbeat as if to go
right, then carried on to the left.  Thokmay stumbled and went down on
one knee.  Rash raced past him, then stopped, walked back, and stuck
out his hand to help him up.  Everybody cheered---everybody except
Noxy.

"Looks like a tie," Rash said, grinning.

"A tie?" Noxy exclaimed.  "There's no such thing as a tie!"

"There is now," Rash replied.  "You're not the only one who gets to
make up rules, you know."

"No, no, she's right," Thokmay panted.  "I'm beaten, fair and square."
He picked up a nearby stick, saluted, and handed it to Rash.

"I'm surrendering," he explained.  "Now you break my sword over your
knee and hand me back the hilt."

Rash snapped the branch, then hesitated.  "Which end is the hilt?"

"It doesn't really matter," Thokmay told him.  Rash gave him the
shorter piece of the stick.  The young soldier accepted it gravely and
tucked it into his belt.  As he did so, Noxy saw him catch Rash's eye
and wink.  Rash winked back, as if sharing a joke.  Noxy could have
punched them both.

"What happens if he doesn't accept your surrender?" Sensy asked.

"He has to," Thokmay assured her.  "Nobody would serve under someone
who didn't."

"Who said anything about serving under you?" Noxy asked petulantly.

"Oh Noxy!" "That's not what he said!" She flushed as the others
rounded on her.

Thokmay looked up at the sun.  "I should get back.  Thank you all for
the game."  He bowed at the village children's answering chorus of
thanks and then walked away, the broken stick still in his hand.
After exchanging glances, Sensy and Rash followed him.  As the rest of
the children followed them, a sinking feeling in the pit of Noxy's
stomach told her that maybe the young soldier actually had won the
game---just not the game she'd thought they were playing.

Indy and Grappa Gas were by the gate when Noxy got back, deep in
conversation with Sergeant Dorbu.  The tiger was there as well,
sitting on his haunches, with Thokmay at his side.  Not for the first
time, Noxy wished there was some other way into Stale that didn't
involve jumping off a low-flying cloud.

"But respected, I promise they'll stay out of everyone's way,"
Sergeant Dorbu was saying.

Indy shook her head.  "Letting you and yours stay here to heal up is
one thing," she said apologetically.  "But if your men start walking
patrols, it'll look an awful lot like we're joining this fight."

"Nothing wrong with that," Grappa Gas muttered, subsiding when Indy
shot him a warning look.

Kulbinder cleared his throat. "May I suggest a compromise?  What if
some of the men were to ride with you when you take the clouds up?
Sure no one could object to you giving them tours?"  He flicked an
ear.  "I'm sure my boy for one would enjoy it."

Ten minutes later Noxy was up in the Quick Tower on her make-believe
cloud, her thimbleberries at her feet and her mother's pointed
reminder still stinging in her ears.  *It's just not fair,* she
thought angrily.  *I have to sit here doing chores, but **he** gets to
go riding.*

She tossed the berries she had picked up back into the bucket and
clambered up to look over the parapet.  Pillow was just leaving the
cloud pen with Grappa Gas and Thokmay on her back.  Noxy could almost
hear Grappa Gas saying, "There's nothing in the world as comfortable
as an old cloud," just like he always did when he took *her* for a
ride.  At least he hadn't brought some maple twists to share with
Thokmay---at least, she *hoped* he hadn't.

*He'll let Pillow rain on the fishpond first,* she thought, *That
way, she won't be fidgety.*

Sure enough, Grappa Gas brought the cloud around in a graceful turn
toward the fishpond.  She didn't need any more instruction than
that. She drifted to a stop, then started to rain contentedly.  The
pair of elders sitting on log benches beside the pond returned Grappa
Gas's wave.

Noxy closed her eyes.  She could practically mind-hear the old cow's
contentment as she slowly began to lighten.  *Why don't you just drop
him in the pond?* she thought despondently.

*Bad,* she imagined Pillow replying.  *Bad hurt.*

*Oh, he'd be all right,* she replied in her head.  *The pond's pretty
deep.  And it'd serve him right for showing off with all his juggling
and his surrendering and stuff.* She imagined Pillow thinning out
underneath Thokmay little by little.  He wouldn't notice right away,
not on his second-ever flight with Grappa Gas talking a gallop a
breath beside him.

She opened her eyes in shock.  There, a hundred strides below her, she
saw Thokmay sink slightly, then some more. He yelped as he suddenly
realized what was happening.

"Hold on!" Grappa Gas shouted, reaching for him, but it was too
late. Thokmay cried out as he fell through the hole in the cloud and
splashed into the ice-cold fishpond.

His head burst above water a moment later. "Help!" he screamed. "Help
me! I can't---" He thrashed his arms as if he was trying to swim, but
something was pulling him down.

Noxy's hand flew to her mouth. His armor! Thokmay must have put his
armor back on!  She watched in horror as Grappa Gas shouted at the
elders to get help. With two quick steps he reached the edge of the
cloud and jumped.

A moment later he surfaced in the pond, spluttering and shouting,
"I've got you, lad!" The old man wrapped one arm around Thokmay and
began to backstroke toward the edge of the pond with the other.

Noxy pelted down the stairs, shouting that they'd fallen in the pond,
both of them, they were going to freeze!  Like everyone who had grown
up in the mountains, she knew how relentless the cold was.  Even if
Grappa Gas got Thokmay out of the water, it could still---

The tiger surged past her.  "Canaries on me!" he roared.  Stalers
leaped out of his way with startled shouts as he charged across the
square and through the gate.

Grappa Gas and Thokmay had been hauled out of the pond and wrapped in
goofskin coats by the time Noxy got there, but were shivering
uncontrollably.  "How did this happen?" Kulbinder demanded for the
tenth time.  "How could he fall?"

Aft shouldered through the gathering crowd with a pair of round jugs
in his hands.  Handing one to Granna Fee, he twisted the lid off the
other and knelt beside the pond to fill it with water, then screwed
the lid back on.

"You just had to show off, didn't you?" he growled at his father.
Without waiting for a reply, he unscrewed the lid and passed the jug
to his father.  "Drink up."

Grappa Gas pushed the now-steaming water aside weakly.  "G-g-give it
to th-th-the boy," he stuttered.

"I'll take care of the boy," Granna Fee said.  She tipped her jug so
that Thokmay could take a sip.  "There you go.  Nice and slow.
That'll warm you up from the inside."

"Th-th-thank you, resp-p-pected."  Thokmay reached for the jug

Granna Fee shook her head.  "I'll hold onto it for now," she said,
kindly but firmly.  "Ulfmaerr only made the two of them, and if you
knew what this old goof eats, I don't think you'd want to share with
him."

It was another ten minutes before Thokmay and Grappa Gas could stand.
They hobbled up the path toward Stale side by side with a crowd of
villagers and soldiers around them.  As they left the pond, Kulbinder
cut Indy off.  "How could this happen?" His ears were flat against his
head, and his eyes glinted dangerously.  "He could have died!"

"They both could have," the mayor replied steadily.  She matched the
tiger's stare until the big cat blinked and looked away.

"I apologize," he rumbled.  "But that doesn't change my question.  I
thought these clouds were safe."

"They are."  Noxy heard the worry in her mother's voice.  "We've been
riding them forever---Big Blue was Grappa Gas's first ride, and
Pillow's not much younger.  They've never done anything like this."

Standing unnoticed two paces behind her mother, Noxy felt as shaky as
Grappa Gas and Thokmay.  She knew why Pillow had dropped Thokmay in
the pond, but she also knew that it was impossible to mind-speak to a
cloud without touching it.  The only problem was, she had felt herself
do it.

She waited with everyone else by the trading hall until Granna Fee
came out.  "He'll be all right," she reassured her granddaughter.  "We
got the hot water into him before the cold could take root."

"Thanks, *amma*."  Noxy fell into step beside her grandmother.  "Do
you think---I mean, I heard people talking.  Do you think someone
could have made Pillow drop him?"

"What? Who said that?" Granna Fee asked sharply.

"I don't know," Noxy hedged, not meeting her grandmother's eyes.  "I
just---I know Grappa Gas wouldn't have done it, and he was the only
'herd on her, and people can't mind-talk to clouds if they're not on
them---can they?"

Her grandmother stopped abruptly and put her hand on Noxy's arm.  "Why
don't we go have a cup of tea?" she said quietly.  "We can talk then."

Ten minutes later they were sitting at the tiny table in Granna Fee's
two-room house, waiting for the kettle to boil.  "I wish we could have
just used one of the magic jugs," Noxy joked weakly.

Granna Fee smiled.  "Me too.  But it'll take them a couple of days at
least to soak up enough heat to work again."  She spooned some tea
into her chipped brown pot, peered at it, and added another spoonful.
"I asked your father if he could make another one, but he said that
part of him was all used up."

"Did he say what part?" Noxy asked hesitantly.

Her grandmother shook her head.  "I didn't ask.  Here, I'll get that."
She took the whistling kettle off the stove and slowly poured the
steaming water into the teapot.  Setting the kettle on a polished
whorl of ironbark, she winked at Noxy and reached into her knitting
basket to pull out a small jar and opened it.  "Honey?"

"I thought you were out?" Noxy said, taking it.

"Only when Gas comes over.  That man..."  She shook her head in mock
despair.

They sipped their tea and put their cups down in unison, as they had
countless times since Indy had become mayor and Noxy had started
spending more time with her granna than with her mother.  "So what
*do* you think happened?" Noxy asked, hoping Granna Fee couldn't hear
her heart thumping.

The old woman shook her head.  "I don't know.  Your father---" She
stopped herself.  "Do you know how he discovered he could do magic?"

Noxy shrugged.  "*Amma* never said."

Granna Fee settled back in her chair with a wince, warming her hands
with her teacup.  "He was fishing one day---not in a pond like here,
but with a net in the ocean, back where he grew up---and he wished
that he was done for the day.  A heartbeat later the net fell apart in
his hands and..."  She shrugged.  "No net, no fishing.  But when he
got back to land and tried to tie up his boat, he couldn't make a
knot.  Every time he tried, he'd drop the end of the rope or it would
tangle in his fingers or something else would happen.  Something had
heard his wish and taken it as a bargain."

She leaned forward.  "He was lucky.  There was another magician in the
town where he grew up who could teach him how to control it.  But he
still wound up making some bad bargains."

"Like having to live where nobody had ever slept on the sea," Noxy
said.

Granna Fee nodded.  "Like that.  It saved someone from shipwreck, he
said, but he was half-crazy by the time he got here.  Even down in
Duck Droppings there was someone who'd been on a ship once, so he
couldn't stay there more than a couple of nights."

"But what does this have to do with Pillow?" Noxy asked.

Granna Fee shrugged again.  "What if it wasn't Pillow?  What if
someone here can do magic, but doesn't realize it yet?"

Noxy took another sip of tea.  Her mouth suddenly felt dry.  "Who?"

"I don't know," her grandmother admitted.  "It might not even be one
of us.  I heard a couple of the soldiers talking in the trading hall
last night, and some of them are pretty angry at the tiger for not
spotting the ambush that got their friends killed.  Maybe one of
them...  I don't know.  It's all so tangled up, half the king's army
on one side and the rest with the princess.  Who knows how many wound
up on the wrong side?"

They talked about other things after that, normal everyday things like
when it would be time to shear the goofs of their winter wool and how
Sensy only seemed to want to talk about her hair and her clothes and
who they might meet that summer and how many dishes Grappa Gas would
wash for a taste of honey.  It felt warm and comfortable, and was
almost enough to convince Noxy that her grandmother might be
right---that what had happened earlier that day had nothing to do with
her.

"I should go," Noxy finally said, eyeing her empty teacup regretfully.
"If I don't get those thimbleberries done, *amma* will shear *me*."

Granna Fee smiled.  "How about you bring them down here and we'll do
them together?"

"Thanks, *amma*, but I said I'd do it."  She stood, then impulsively
stepped around the table to give her grandmother a hug.  "I love you."

"I love you too, daffodil."  They held each other for a moment, one
wondering when the other had gotten so big, the other wondering when
the first had gotten so small, and then Noxy left.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 6: The Coming Storm

Afternoon was flirting with evening by the time Aft returned on
Pillow.  "She was huddled up in the canyon above Tinker's Creek," he
told Indy, his face set in an even deeper scowl than usual.  "She was
skittish like I've never seen her.  Managed to spook a whole graze of
wildings, too.  One poke and it'll turn into a stampede."

Indy nodded.  Aft had found her up on the wall, where she had come to
check on Noxy's progress.  The two adults were looking west, where
sheets of cirrus were gathering above the peaks.  "Then let's hope
nothing pokes them," she said after a moment.  "Although the way this
day's gone..."

Noxy kept her eyes on her thimbleberries.  She had learned a long time
ago that if she didn't draw attention to herself, adults would
sometimes forget that she could hear them.  She had learned a lot
about cloudherding and negotiating with traders that way, along with a
few things about her mother's youthful misadventures that she was
definitely not supposed to know.

After a few more details about the wild clouds he'd seen and a barbed
comment about whether there was anything his father wouldn't do to
impress people, Aft nodded a goodbye and left.  "Finish those later,"
Indy told Noxy, her eyes still on the gathering clouds.  "We have
other chores right now."

Stale was no stranger to storms.  When bulls battled each other in the
dead of winter, the snow fell so thick and so fast that people had to
string ropes between the houses to find their way.  And in the summer,
when nimbus clouds that had stayed in the north to give birth flew
south to rejoin their herds, the sky could darken in the time it took
to sing a nursery rhyme.  When that happened, the villagers knew it
was time to tie their shutters closed and get the goofs indoors,
because the rain was going to come down in sheets instead of drops.

"I am from Thind," Kulbinder growled when Indy told him why she wanted
the soldiers to stay in the trading hall.  "I have lived through
monsoons.  This could not possibly be worse."

"Maybe not, but I bet it'll be a lot colder," Sergeant Dorbu said.  He
and his men had spent the afternoon washing the bodies of their fallen
comrades and patching the holes and tears in their uniforms.  Those
who were well enough had scoured the woods for firewood as well,
stacking it to make a pyre just down the hill from the fortress gate.
Indy and Noxy had found him there, helping as best he could while
three of the village elders laid a spiderweb net over the wood so that
it wouldn't blow away.

Kulbinder sniffed.  "Storm or not, someone should be on patrol.  But I
agree, it would be best if the men stayed warm."

"How---how is Thokmay doing?" Noxy asked hesitantly.

The tiger looked at her for a moment before replying.  "He is well,"
he said.  "He is strong, and Respected Gas got to him quickly.  He
will be well."

The sun had almost disappeared behind the mountains when the first
sharp line of lightning sparked the far-off clouds.  Granna Fee said a
word Noxy wasn't supposed to know.  "Let's not dawdle," she said
briskly, pulling another armload of damp laundry off a drying line and
stuffing it in a sack.  Ten strides away, Little Gas was pulling apart
strips of cedar bark so that Sensy could lay them along the irrigation
trenches in the vegetable garden.  Children, grandparents, and
everyone else who could walk hurried to ready the village, stepping
around soldiers or shooing them out of the way as they watched the
sudden flurry of activity with bemusement.

Noxy carried the last sack of laundry upstairs to her bedroom for want
of anywhere else to put it.  Her mother was chopping onions by the
time she got back downstairs.  "Thanks, daffodil," she said, blinking
away a tear.  "Can you do some potatoes?  And see if the cheese is
still fit to eat.  I hope the tiger isn't too picky."

Noxy pulled up short.  "The tiger?"

Indy sniffled.  "Yes, he's coming for dinner.  So is the sergeant.
His boy's still in bed."  She swept a double handful of diced onions
into the cooking pot with the back of the knife and started peeling
what was probably the last knob of ginger in Stale.  "It's the polite
thing to do," she continued without looking as Noxy opened and then
closed her mouth.

"Yes, *amma*."  Noxy set the loosely-woven bag of potatoes on the
potato and began to scrub the skins off them with a piece of
sandstone.  She had almost decided to tell her mother what had really
happened that morning, but that wasn't a discussion she wanted to
start now---not the way her mother got whenever company was coming.

Sergeant Dorbu knocked on their door just as the rain began to fall.
Noxy had been expecting him to be in his uniform, but he had traded in
his helmet for a plain goofskin cap that any cloudherd might have
worn, and had left his sword behind.

Kulbinder padded in behind him while he and Indy were saying their
hellos.  He flowed up onto the chair across from Noxy and watched
impassively as she swept the last scraps of potato off the table.  "He
is better," the tiger said abruptly.

Noxy jumped slightly.  "Oh.  You mean Thokmay?  Um, I'm glad to hear
it.  It's pretty dangerous, getting dunked in frozen water like that.
It happened to one of the goofs a couple of years ago.  She got out of
their pen and tried to get across the---um.  It doesn't matter.  But
I'm glad he's all right."  She could feel her cheeks burning under the
tiger's cool stare.

Her cheeks heated up even more when she saw Sergeant Dorbu's grin.
"Don't worry," he said cheerfully.  "He does that to everyone.
Saints, I almost swallowed my fork the first time I met him."

"It was a spoon," Kulbinder corrected.  "And it was more than
'almost'."

And just like that the rhythm of the meal took shape.  Sergeant Dorbu
had a seemingly inexhaustible supply of stories about his foolishness,
clumsiness, or bad choices.  Indy asked just enough questions to keep
the stories coming, while Kulbinder's dry comments provoked protests
of innocence and occasional snorts of laughter.  As she table a tray
bearing grilled slabs of cheese, fried onions, and boiled potatoes,
Noxy realized with a start that she was actually enjoying herself.
The mood was only slightly dampened by the tiger sniffing at the
cheese and then saying thank you, but it would probably upset his
digestion, he would hunt in the forest after the storm was over.

Conversation became more serious after the dishes were cleared.  The
Angry Canaries had declared for Princess Shudarga almost as soon as
she raised her banner, and had been fighting ever since.  "Or getting
to a fight, or getting away from one, or trying to get enough food in
our bellies to keep us fighting," Sergeant Dorbu added.  "We were up
north, with the Cut Cards under Colonel Ordshe in Panday, right in the
middle of Shudarga's land."

"Is that why you chose her side?" Indy asked as she splashed some dark
mountain *rak* into a glass and passed it to him.  Catching Noxy's
eye, she poured a thimbleworth into another glass and handed it to her
daughter.  The pungent fumes tingled in Noxy's nose as she tasted it
gingerly.

Sergeant Dorbu shook his head.  "Wasn't for that.  My family..."  He
paused, rolling his glass between his hands as if to warm them.  "We
used to have land.  Not much---really just a big farm with a couple of
tenants to work it---but it was enough to keep us.  Then one of our
neighbors decided he wanted it.  She honeyed up the local *tralpa*,
promised him a slice of the takings, and..."  He spread his hands.
"By the time we got to court, she'd rented all the laws that would
have saved us.  We had a week to clear out after living their all our
lives."

"That must have been horrible," Indy said sympathetically.

"It is foolishness," Kulbinder rumbled.  "The law in Thind is not
something to be borrowed for money like a bullock.  There are rules
for each station, and that is that."

"But then how does the king raise money?" Noxy asked.

Kulbinder blinked slowly.  "The emperor takes what he needs when he
needs it.  It is...simpler."

"Simpler *and* fairer," Sergeant Dorbu added with a quiet intensity
that hadn't been there a moment earlier.  "And that's what the
princess wants.  Laws should be there for everyone, all the time, not
just for whoever has the most money on the day of a trial.  And if
that means a bunch of royals have to work for a living instead of
renting out laws some king gave their great-great-grands way back
when, that's fine by me."  He drained his glass in one quick gulp.
When her mother did the same, Noxy held her breath and swallowed the
last of her own *rak*.

The thick black liquid felt like fiery smoke as it went down her
throat.  She clenched her jaw, but a strangled cough managed to
escape.  "And that's enough for *you* tonight," her mother said in
mock-disapproval.

"Yes, *amma*," Noxy said, gasping for air.

"Here."  Her mother pushed the empty kettle across the table.  "How
about you refill that and I'll make tea?  It sounds like the worst of
the storm has passed, and a bit of air will help you clear your head."

Noxy nodded, not trusting herself to speak.  She slipped her feet into
her boots without bothering to do up the laces, pulled a poncho over
her head, and stumbled out into the night.

Rain was still falling, but Indy had been right---most of the panicked
clouds had passed, and the few stragglers chasing them were already
east of Stale, heading toward the plains.  She watched them for a
moment, then closed her eyes.

"Goof," she muttered a moment later.  Of *course* she hadn't been able
to mind-hear anything.  What had happened earlier with Thokmay had
been a coincidence.  She shouldn't---

Something clattered in the narrow jitty between her house and the
yarning shed.  Noxy opened her mouth to ask who was there, but stopped
herself.  What if the troll had come back?  There was no reason it
would, but there was no reason it would have been in the village in
the first place.

She set the kettle down quietly on the front step of her house and
tiptoed gingerly toward the jitty.  Holding her breath, she leaned
forward and peeked around the corner, just in time to see a shadowy
figure disappear out the other end.  It was definitely a person, not a
troll, but who would be out in the rain?

*The soldiers,* she realized.  It had to be one of the soldiers,
except why would they be out in the rain either?  Suspicious, she
hurried to follow.

"Ow!"  Ten steps in, her foot connected with a pile of cobblestones
that she and Sensy had put there as part of some long-forgotten game.
The stones clattered as they tumbled over.  Cursing under her breath,
she stepped over them, wishing that she had taken a moment earlier to
do up her laces.  Some of the broken cobbles had sharp edges, and if
she lost a boot now, she'd never catch up.

She reached the other end of the jitty just in time to see the shadowy
figure disappear around the edge of the tannery.  She hesitated for
only a moment before sprinting after it, her boots splashing in
shallow puddles of rainwater.  Whoever she was chasing was bound to
hear her---the only question was whether she could catch them first.

She rounded the corner of the tanning shed a moment later.  Her quarry
was nowhere to be seen.  "Rot," she cursed.  Left toward the trading
hall, straight on toward the square, or right toward the vegetable
patches and the gate?

*Crack!* She shrieked with surprise as a bolt of lightning split the
sky, then stomped her foot, angry at herself, the rain, and the world
in general.  She'd lost them.  And by the time she got back, her
mother was sure to give her the "what took you so long?" look that she
hated so much.

*Crack!* Another bolt of lightning left a dazzling scar on the night.
That one had been close, she realized uneasily---too close.  The
lightnings must be nipping at the clouds that had fallen behind their
herd.  She was suddenly glad that she wasn't airborne.  She had only
ever been on one night flight, when Granna Fee took her up on her
nameday when she turned ten to show her a passing star.

*CRACK! BOOM!* Noxy shrieked as the third bolt of lightning struck the
weatherduck spinning madly next to the fortress gate and shattered its
wooden pole.  Splinters flew in all directions to clatter off roofs
and cobblestones.

One smoking scrap bounced off a chimney and clattered through a window
whose shutter had been left untied.  As Noxy blinked to clear the
after-dazzle of the lightning strike from her eyes, the sheets of
dried moss that the wood had landed in began to smolder.

A door banged open.  "Saints!" Aft hurried over to Noxy.  "Are you all
right?  What in the name of all that rots are you doing out in this?"

"*Amma* wanted me to fill the kettle," Noxy said stupidly.  She shook
her head.  "It---the lightning hit it."

"I can see the lightning hit it," Aft said testily.  He took her by
the shoulders and peered into her eyes, then relaxed slightly.
"You'll be all right.  Just a bit of a scare.  Come on, let's get you
back to---wait."  He sniffed.  "What's burning?"

Noxy grabbed his arm and pointed.  "There!  Upstairs!"  A bright lick
of flame was suddenly dancing in a window.  Another joined it as the
familiar herby smell of burning moss caught in Noxy's nostrils.

"Get your mother!" Aft ordered, then cupped his hands around his
mouth.  "Fire!  Fire!  Fire!"

The village was lucky.  That's what everyone told themselves half an
hour later.  They were lucky that the rain had made everything so wet,
that there had been so little of the autumn moss left to burn, that
Aft had spotted the fire so quickly.  They were lucky the soldiers had
been there to fill and pass buckets---with most of the adults gone,
well, the elders and children would have done the best they could, but
things could have been a lot worse.

"But what were you doing *there*?" Indy demanded as she and her
daughter walked home arm in arm.  "You were just supposed to refill
the kettle!"

"I thought I saw something, like a troll."  Noxy shook her head.  "I
didn't get a good look at it."  Which wasn't exactly a lie, but was an
uncomfortable distance from the truth.  The hooded figure had
definitely been a person, but a bit short for an adult.  And as the
soldiers had arrived to help with the fire, only one of them had been
the height of the figure she had seen.  But why would Thokmay have
been out in the rain when he could have been at dinner?  And what had
he been doing in the jitty beside her house?

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 7: Discovered!

Stale woke to the muffled stillness that only ever comes after storms
and minor disasters.  The air was still damp and chill, but the sky
was so clear that the peaks around the village almost sparkled.  A
sharp-edged whiff of charred wood hung everywhere, sweetened slightly
by the potpourri of the moss that the brief fire had consumed.

It was a day for dawdling: for taking a little longer than usual to
get out of bed, for letting the kettle boil a few heartbeats longer
than it needed to, for discussing the day's chores in a little more
detail than absolutely necessary rather than getting up from breakfast
to start doing them.  No one wanted to hurry, not even the soldiers
whose turn it was to patrol the road leading up to Stale and the paths
through the forest behind it.

Sergeant Dorbu spread his hands helplessly when Indy asked if the
patrols were strictly necessary.  "Regulations," he said
apologetically.

Grappa Gas nodded firmly.  "That's right.  Have to stick to routine if
you don't want people to go slack."  Indy and Noxy had found the two
of them in the square, sharing strong cups of tea and advice about how
best to extend the fishpond (though Noxy suspected the sergeant had
mostly been listening to that part).

A shutter clattered open above them.  Noxy glanced up to see Aft
glaring down at them, his own mug clenched in his hand.  When he
realized she had seen him, he scowled and disappeared from the window.

Indy followed her daughter's gaze.  "All right," she told the sergeant
absently.  "If you think it's necessary."  She put her hand on Noxy's
shoulder.  "Why don't you round up Sensy and Rash and see if you can
keep the littles busy this morning?  We need to clean up the mess from
last night, and they'd just be under foot."

By the time the soldiers and Kulbinder left twenty minutes later, Aft
and Indy were working with a dozen elders to tear apart the ruined
upper floor of the burned storage shed.  Charred beams were knocked
free by heavy hammers and set in a pile to have their nails pulled.
In a moment of inspiration, Noxy had Rash and Sensy drag a few of the
least-damaged timbers to the other side of the square and lay them out
in a zig-zag pattern for the littles to walk along.  Were they a
tightrope?  A secret path through a jungle?  Or a bridge over a pit
full of lava, and if you fell off, you'd be burned alive?  The littles
seemed to be happy to believe all three at once, and as far as Noxy
was concerned, anything that kept them from interrupting her repeated
yawns was fine.

It was shaping up to be a perfect morning until one of the soldiers
who had gone on patrol came running through the gate with his sword in
his hands and bellowed, "At arms!  At arms!  They've found us!"

Sergeant Dorbu dropped the beam he was manhandling and swung down from
the upper story of the ruined shed.  "Soldier! Report!" he snapped.

The soldier pulled up short and thumped his fist to his chest in
salute.  His left hand was still in bandages, and the stitches holding
the gash on his check closed were crusty with scabs.  "Respected!" he
wheezed.  "They... they..."

"Catch your breath, soldier."  Sergeant Dorbu wiped his hand clean on
his kilt and put two fingers in his mouth to whistle.  The shrill
double tone made Noxy jump.  One of the children who had been walking
the zig-zag of beams stumbled, then started to cry because she had
stepped in the lava and had to go back to the beginning.  Sensy
shushed her, eyes as wide as Noxy's as the soldiers who had stayed
behind tumbled out of the trading hall door, some on crutches, others
still pulling on clothes.

"Respected!"  The soldier straightened up and saluted again.
"Royalist rangers, respected.  Two of 'em, light packs, with forest
bows and short swords.  The tiger got 'em."

"Alive?" Sergeant Dorbu demanded.

The soldier nodded.  "Yes respected.  Chased 'em into us, respected,
just like we practiced."  He gulped.  "But there was a bird with 'em,
respected.  A crow.  It got away."

"Rot," Sergeant Dorbu swore.  "Was it Gifted?"

The soldier shook his head.  "Dunno, respected.  Didn't hear it say
anything."

Indy cut in.  "Sergeant, does this mean there's an army coming?"  The
question sent Sensy's hands flying to her mouth.  Before Noxy could
say anything to comfort her, Rash put his arm over her shoulders and
gave her a squeeze.  On any other day, Noxy would have been shocked
and said something sarcastic.  Right then, her only thought was a
slightly bewildered, *But I'm scared too.*

Sergeant Dorbu thought a moment before shaking his head.  "Not likely,
mayor.  Rangers usually stay a day or two out from regular soldiers.
My bet is a regiment has settled in at the foot of the pass to hold it
closed now that it's clear enough to get through."  He scowled.  "But
if these two don't report back---"

"---someone's going to come looking for them," Indy finished bleakly.

The next few minutes were as rushed as the time before had been
relaxed.  Dorbu picked a dozen men by name and told them to get their
gear on.  He sent the rest back to bed---they could still barely walk,
and if there *was* going to be a fight, he wanted them out of it.  But
no, he didn't think there'd be a fight---not today, anyway.

"And tomorrow?" Grappa Gas asked.  "What are we all supposed to while
you lot are chopping each other to pieces in the square?  No, I
*won't* shush!"  he snapped at Indy as she opened her mouth.  "Having
a laugh at the *tralpa* is one thing, but sheltering rebels, that's
another, and if you think we won't be held to answer for it when the
king's men show up---"

"It won't come to that," Sergeant Dorbu interrupted.  "I promise."  He
raised his voice.  "I spoke to the mayor last night.  If the royalists
show up in force, we'll either take our chances getting through the
pass, or surrender.  We won't put you in danger."  He drew his knife
and laid it across his palm.  "On my blood."

"No need for that," Indy said hastily.  "We're happy to just take your
word.  Aren't we?"  She shot a stern look at Grappa Gas.

"Of course," the old man grumbled.  He looked at the handful of nails
he'd accumulated and sighed.  "What a mess."

The patrol arrived back in Stale a few minutes later with its two
prisoners, but without Kulbinder, who was combing the woods for other
rangers.  "Or that damn bird," one of the soldiers said.  "I'm sorry,
respected, I should have got an arrow off, but it was just so rotting
quick."

"Don't worry about it," Sergeant Dorbu said, clapping him on the
shoulder.  "Now, who do we have here?"

The royalist soldiers wore the same kilts and armor as the rebels, but
had red and blue bands on their cuffs.  Glancing at the sergeant's
sleeves, Noxy saw stitch marks where matching bands had been removed.
Both men had weathered faces and close-trimmed beards, though the
larger one's was going gray while the smaller's was still as black as
his skin.  Both wore the same expression of sullen resignation, and
neither seemed inclined to answer the sergeant.

He waited a moment, then sighed.  "All right.  Respected, is there a
shed of some sort we could borrow?  Something with a door that locks?"

Indy blinked.  "I don't think any of our doors lock.  Oh, except the
sugar chests in the trading hall, to keep the children out, but they'd
never fit in there.  Grappa?"

Grappa Gas started to shake his head, then snapped his fingers.  "What
about the tunnels?  We could put them in there and nail some boards
across to stop them running off."  He gestured at the salvaged timber
beside them.

"Tunnels?" Sergeant Dorbu asked.  He turned to Indy.  "What tunnels?"

In the end, he chose the same tunnel that Noxy had shown Thokmay the
day before.  As the two prisoners pried the old wooden grill off the
entrance under the watchful eyes of the sergeant, half a dozen of his
men, an equal number of villagers, and a gaggle of children, Noxy
debated telling someone---her mother, Sergeant Dorbu, *someone*---that
Thokmay had known the tunnel was there.  Why hadn't he told the
sergeant?  And had it been him out in the rain last night, or the
younger ranger?  He was a head shorter than his partner---maybe, in
the dark, she could have mistaken him for a boy?

The old wooden grill clattered to the ground.  "Right, in you go," Aft
growled.  He had been holding a spare piece of wood like a club while
the prisoners worked, clearly not trusting them not to bolt or the
rebel soldiers to stop them if they did.

The older ranger spoke for the first time.  "What about the
necessaries?"

"We'll get you a bucket," Sergeant Dorbu.  "And something to eat."  He
cocked an eyebrow at Indy.  "And maybe a couple of blankets?"

"Yes, respected---and will you want some feather pillows to go with
them?"  she replied, but she smiled as she said it.

The two captured soldiers lifted a salvaged beam for Grappa Gas to
nail into place.  The older captive watched him bang the first couple
of nails into place, then snorted and looked away.  "What?" the
cloudherd asked.

"Didn't say anything," the royalist muttered.

Grappa Gas put his hands on his hips.  "Well, you didn't say it pretty
loudly.  You mind speaking up?"

The soldier shrugged.  "Just don't like seeing a job done poorly, is
all," he said, his lowland accent turning 'seeing' to 'saying' and
'all' to 'ale'.

"Don't like---it's just nailing, man!" Grappa Gas blustered.  Some of
the villagers hid smiles, knowing how proud the old man was of his
handiwork.

The soldier shrugged again.  "Don't mind me, I'm just here to hold the
heavy stuff."

"Hmph!"  Grappa Gas placed the next nail and lined up the hammer with
exaggerated care.  As he swung it back, the soldier snorted again.
The hammer came down squarely on Grappa Gas's thumb.

"Ow!  Rot and damnation, man!"  Grappa Gas stuck his thumb in his
mouth, glaring at the soldier.  "That hurts!"

"Leave him be," the younger soldier said.  "Worse he does, the sooner
as we're quit of here."

"Right, that's it."  Grappa Gas strode forward and held out the
hammer.  "You're so crafty, you show us how it's done."

The soldier glanced at the hammer, then at Sergeant Dorbu, who spread
his hands.  "As long as the job gets done," he said, struggling to
keep a straight face.  Some of the villagers weren't even struggling
any more, and Aft was grinning outright at his father's embarrassment.

The soldier shrugged once more.  "Sure.  Here, you take this."
Grunting, the two men swapped places.

"A little higher.  Yup.  That's it.  Nope, in closer to the wall.
Hold it."  The soldier eyed the beam's position critically.  "Good
enough."

And with no more warning than that he spun around and swung the hammer
at Sergeant Dorbu's head.  The sergeant barely flung his arm to block
the blow. *Thud!* The hammer made an ugly meaty sound as it connected
with his forearm.

At the same instant, the younger soldier flung his end of the beam at
Aft.  Aft jumped back with a curse so that the beam clattered to the
ground at his feet instead of crushing his toes.  "Run!" he shouted
needlessly as the older soldier charged through the crowd.

Someone shrieked.  Grappa Gas yelled, "After him!" and took two steps
before stumbling and falling to his knees, having forgotten about his
wooden leg for the first time in twenty years.

Two of the rebel soldiers were already running after the escaping
prisoner.  The younger one feinted left, then lunged right to go in
the opposite direction.  Without thinking, Noxy stuck out her foot.
"Oof!" The soldier sprawled facelong on the ground.  "Owf!"  Aft
landed on top of him.

The two scrabbled for a moment in the dirt before the soldier suddenly
relaxed.  "I yield!" he said.  "I yield, damn it!  Get off me!"

"Like hell," Aft grunted, twisting the soldier's arm up behind his
back.  He got up on one knee, then rose to his feet without relaxing
his grip.  "What do you want done with him?"

Sergeant Dorbu was cradling the arm that had taken the hammer blow.
His jaw was set and his eyes cold.  "Put him in the hole," he said
curtly.  "You!"  He nodded at Noxy.  "Get to the gate.  Tell whoever's
there what's happened, but keep your distance, you hear?  Don't try to
stop him."

"What?" Indy exclaimed.  "Wait!  She's not a---" But Noxy was already
gone.

The escaped soldier had gone back the way they had come, through the
village.  The path at the base of the wall was longer, but Noxy knew
it like her tongue knew her teeth.  She vaulted over a crate someone
had left out through the winter, skidded on a cobblestone that was
still crusted with winter ice, dodged around Sensy's startled granna
and grappa with a shout of, "Look out, he's escaped!", and practically
flew into the narrow jitty between their house and their neighbors.

Her boots splashed in a puddle left behind by the previous night's
storm.  As she burst out the other end, she plowed straight into
Thokmay and knocked him off his feet.

"Sorry!" Noxy exclaimed, reaching down to help him back to his feet.
"Did you hear?  One of the soldiers escaped!  We've got to tell
whoever's at the gate!"

"Go ahead," Thokmay gasped, waving her on as he tried to re-fill his
lungs.  "I'll catch up."

That was all Noxy needed.  She raced along the side of the trading
hall and sprinted across the square to the gate.  Three soldiers were
standing there, two on their own feet and one on crutches.  She
quickly explained what had happened.

"Hasn't come by here," the one on crutches said.  He had a single
yellow ribbon around his sleeve, and a thick bandage wrapped around
his shin.

"Yet," another added grimly, drawing his sword and hefting it in his
hand.  "Best for him he doesn't, either."

Boots clomped on the cobblestones as Thokmay trotted up to join them.
"Is there any other way out?" he asked Noxy.

She shook her head.  "Not unless he can fly."  She hesitated.  "But if
he finds some rope, and gets up onto the wall, he might be able to
climb down."

Thokmay nodded.  "I'll find Kulbinder and warn him," he told the three
soldiers.

"I'll come with you," Noxy said hurriedly.

"No!" Thokmay told her.  "It's too dangerous."

Noxy stared at him in disbelief.  "Too dangerous?  I know the forest a
lot better than you do!"

Thokmay patted the sword at his hip.  "And I know a lot more about
fighting than you do."

"Take her with you," the soldier on crutches ordered.

"But---"

"That's an order," the soldier said sternly, pointing at the ribbon
around his sleeve.

"Yes respected," Thokmay replied woodenly.  Without looking at Noxy,
he said, "Lead the way."

The air was colder and damper in the forest gloom.  Noxy rubbed her
arms to warm them as she walked.  Thokmay didn't seem to mind.  *But
he wouldn't with that thick coat on,* she thought sourly.  It didn't
look like it had gotten wet the night before, but if he'd been wearing
a rain cape...  And it would have had plenty of time to dry if he'd
hung it up near one of the big fireplace stoves in the trading
hall---their thick stone sides stayed warm all night.

Thokmay raised a hand.  "Hold."  He pointed the forest floor in front
of them.  "This must be where they fought.  See where the branches are
broken?"

"If you say so," Noxy said, rubbing her arms more vigorously.
Cloudherds learned how to read the sky almost before they learned how
to read books, but woodcraft was mystery to her.  Truth be told, she
had never really liked being in the forest.  The trees always seemed
to loom over her.  It wasn't too bad when the birds were singing, but
when it was silent---

"Why is it so quiet?" she asked, suddenly realizing that she hadn't
heard anything for the last hundred heartbeats except the soft
pitter-pat of water dripping from the branches around them.

"Sh..."  Thokmay made a cutting gesture with his hand.  "Something's
watching us."

Noxy shivered.  "Is it the tiger?" she whispered.  She glanced over
her shoulder.  They were only a couple of hundred strides from the
fortress gate, but it felt like home and sunlight and safety were a
world away.  The forest didn't want them there.  It didn't want their
voices or their boots or the short sword that was suddenly in
Thokmay's hand.

She pressed the heels of her hands to her temples.  What was
happening?  She couldn't be mind-hearing the forest---could she?  She
must be going crazy.  It was too much---it couldn't all fit.  Her head
was going to burst.

"It's too big..." Noxy whimpered.  

"Sh!" Thokmay hissed urgently.  "Be quiet!"

Noxy put a hand on a nearby tree to steady herself.  The bark was cold
and damp but reassuringly solid.  The little beads of sap under her
palm were frozen nearly solid but still sticky.  She took a deep,
shaky breath.  She wasn't going to throw up after all.  "I'm all
right," she told Thokmay, smiling weakly.  "Just...  just a headache."
Somewhere nearby, a sapsucker chirped uncertainly.  A squirrel
chattered in response, and from right behind her, a tiger spoke.

"What are you doing here?" Kulbinder demanded.  Noxy shrieked and spun
around.  The tiger ignored her.  "You should be in the village!"

"One of the prisoners escaped, respected.  The older one.  Took a
hammer to the sergeant, but he'll be all right.  He's probably still
inside the walls, and Corporal Choegyal at the gate is watching for
him."

The tiger growled.  "I've seen nothing.  But you were foolish to come
here."  He glanced at Noxy.  "And doubly foolish to bring her."

Noxy opened her mouth to protest that he hadn't brought her, she had
volunteered.  An all-too-familiar twinge in the back of her head
stopped her.  She looked up, but could only see a few tiny patches of
blue.  "We should hurry," she told the others.  There was a cloud
coming---a big one---and it was moving fast.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 8: Royalty

The first thing the soldiers at the gate told Kulbinder was that the
escaped royalist was still missing, but hadn't come by them.  The
second was that Sergeant Dorbu's arm hadn't been broken, but it would
be a while before he could swing a sword properly.

"Remain here," Kulbinder ordered the soldiers.  "I will hunt for the
prisoner.  You."  He twitched an ear at Thokmay.  "You have chores, do
you not?"

"Yes, respected."  Thokmay and the other soldiers saluted the tiger's
hindquarters as he padded away.

As he disappeared around a corner, Noxy cleared her throat.  "Um, I'd
better go see if my *amma* needs me."

Thokmay nodded.  "I hope you're feeling better."  He saluted the other
soldiers and headed for the trading hall.

Noxy made a beeline for the wall stairs.  Once up on the parapet, she
scanned the horizon.  There!  The cloud was still so small that she
could have covered it with her thumb, but it was definitely headed
toward Stale.

She found her mother by the tunnel entrance, watching while Grappa Gas
hammered a beam into place.  The younger prisoner sat inside on a
blanket, spooning cold rice into his mouth from a bowl.  Sergeant
Dorbu and Aft were gone, but four extra soldiers stood with the two
holding the beam in place.

Noxy put her hand on her mother's arm.  "*Amma*, there's a cloud
coming.  It'll be here soon."

Indy frowned.  "Who is it?"

Her daughter shook her head.  "I don't know, but it's big.  *Really*
big."

Her mother shook her head despairingly.  "There's never just one
raindrop, is there?  All right.  Go find Aft and your granna.  And
the sergeant too, if you can find him.  He and his men are---oh!"  She
jumped as Kulbinder landed on the ground beside her with a sound like
a wet blanket falling on a floor.

"Sergeant Dorbu is searching the tannery," the tiger said, his ears
back and his tail bristling.  "The smell is truly disgusting.  If the
prisoner is in there, he is welcome to it.  Now, what is this about
raindrops?"

Fifteen minutes later, a small crowd stood on the mounting platform
watching the cloud approach.  Sergeant Dorbu and Kulbinder were front
and center, but a trio of soldiers with bows had split off to take
positions overlooking the canyon.  When Indy and Grappa Gas protested,
the sergeant cut them off.  "They won't do anything unless I tell them
to," he said.  "And I won't tell them to unless it's absolutely
necessary."

"Since when do you get to decide what's necessary?" Grappa Gas
demanded.

"Since someone disappeared without a trace in a village the size of a
bathtub," the sergeant shot back.  Then he shook his head and said,
"I'm sorry.  I shouldn't have said that."

The cloud descended as it approached.  The soldiers on the platform
loosened their swords in their scabbards.  Grappa Gas rapped his
knuckles against his wooden leg, three and two, three and two, until
Indy quietly asked him to stop.  Below them, Big Blue and Pillow
stirred restlessly, pushing themselves from one side of the pen to the
other as the strange cloud approached.

Noxy closed her eyes and tried to slow her thumping heart.  After what
had happened in the forest, she was scared to try to mind-talk at all,
much less to a cloud she didn't know.  She jumped a little when her
mother gave her hand a reassuring squeeze.  "Don't worry," Indy said
softly.  "Everything's going to be all right."

Noxy nodded.  The cloud was about to disappear behind the spurs and
ridges that rose above the pass.  She closed her eyes again.  That
grumbling mind-mutter was Big Blue.  And that---that must be Pillow.
So the newcomer was...

Her eyes shot open as Aft cursed, "Rot and ruin.  It had to be him,
didn't it?"

"But who's he carrying?" Grappa Gas, shading his eyes.

"Who's 'he'?" Sergeant Dorbu asked.

Aft's mouth twisted.  "His name's Tasteless.  But you might as well
just call him trouble, because he always is."

The cloud bumped against the mounting platform a minute later.
"Canaries---reeee... spect!" Sergeant Dorbu bellowed in a parade
ground voice.  As one, the assembled soldiers thumped their fists to
their chests in salute.

"Why thank you!"  The bandy-legged man who hopped down from the cloud
sketched a bow.  "It's nice to finally get the welcome I deserve."

"It's not for you, you goof," Aft muttered.

The bandy-legged man's grin widened, but before he could answer,
another man stepped onto the platform and returned Sergeant Dorbu's
salute.  His close-cropped hair was shot through with gray, and his
face was as cold and as hard as the mountains around them.  Where the
sergeant had two ribbons sewn around his sleeve, the newcomer had
three yellow braids.  He returned the Angry Canaries' salute as half a
dozen other soldiers' dismounted beside him, their boots drumming on
the mounting platform.  They all wore spotless uniforms, and all had
the same stony look as their commander.

"Sergeant," the newcomer snapped.  "I trust the archers we saw coming
in are friendly?"

"Yes, colonel."

The colonel nodded.  "Good.  My men will be bringing them down."  He
glanced sideways.  "And the Gifted?"

"He's with us too, respected."  Sergeant Dorbu cleared his throat.
"May I asked, respected, what is---oh."  The soldier blinked rapidly,
then inhaled and bellowed, "Canaries---reeee... spect!" once again as
the most respected Princess Shudarga, formerly *tral-tralpa* of the
six districts that made up the northern quarter of Gandan, now leader
of the rebellion, slid down off the cloud onto the mounting platform.

She was not much taller than Noxy, stocky and broad-shouldered like a
stonemason.  The golden thread in embroidered collar of office around
her neck gleamed against her dark skin.  When she smiled, her teeth
seemed as white as the snow-capped peaks around them.

"Well, this is a pleasant surprise," she said warmly.  "Colonel Bonzon,
could you introduce us please?"

"My apologies, most respected.  Sergeant?"

It shouldn't have been possible for Sergeant Dorbu to straighten up
any further, but somehow he managed it.  "Dorbu, respected, acting
commander of fifth troop, second regiment of ordinary foot.  This is
my second and chief scout, the Gifted Kulbinder, and the respected
Literally Indigestible, mayor of Stale Leftovers."

Indy bowed.  The rest of the villagers followed suit---even Grappa
Gas, though he hesitated one rebellious heartbeat before doing so.

The princess acknowledged their bows with a slight nod.  "And how, may
I ask, did the second regiment's fifth troop wind up here?  Aren't you
supposed to be in Chaghan?"

Sergeant Dorbu grimaced.  "About that, most respected..."

The villagers might as well not have been there as Colonel Bonzon and
the princess peppered Sergeant Dorbu with questions on the walk back
to Stale.  When he described the ambush, they asked about the makeup
of the royalist forces.  When he told them about being trapped by the
forest, and about the cloudherds rescuing their wounded comrades,
their questions were about the surviving men.  How many were fit
enough to march?  How many would be if they had another day or two to
rest?

And when he told them about the two royalist rangers they had
captured, and that one of them was on the loose, she didn't even break
stride.  "Colonel Bonzon will handle it, I'm sure," she said.

As short as the princess was, she moved briskly, and didn't seem fazed
at all by the thin mountain air.  Colonel Bonzon stayed beside her, his
hand never far from the hilt of his sword, while the half-dozen
soldiers that Noxy now realized were bodyguards kept pace ahead and
behind.  The villagers trailed behind like the tail of a comet, with
Grappa Gas stumping along at the rear, cursing quietly under his
breath as he tried to keep up.  The cloudherd Tasteless kept to the
back as well, either because he couldn't be bothered to rush, or
because he was prudent enough to stay as far away from Aft as
possible.

"Now, what about these trolls?" the princess asked.  "How aggressive
were they?"

"They're mostly not trouble at all, most respected," Aft broke in, all
trace of his usual belligerence gone.  "Not so long as we keep to
what's ours and don't disturb what's theirs."

"Good," she said crisply.  "And the forest itself?  How likely are we
to be able to get troops through to Chaghan?"

Sergeant Dorbu shook his head.  "Sorry, most respected.  A few rangers
might make it, but nothing more."  She pursed her lips at that, but
didn't reply.

The three archers Sergeant Dorbu had sent up the ridge were waiting at
the fortress gate when they arrived, watched over by twice their
number of the new arrivals.  The archers had the sullen look of
schoolchildren who have just been told their homework isn't good
enough and will have to be redone.  The princess's men had the same
close-trimmed beards and leathered skin of the royalist rangers.  They
all saluted as the princess and her entourage approached.

"Stand easy," she ordered.  "Mayor Indigestible, please let the colonel
know where the men can quarter, and where you'd like me to stay.
Colonel, I want a complete inventory in two hours---everything we still
have, everything we're missing.  And put out some patrols, not that I
need to tell you your job."  She yawned suddenly, then blinked as if
she was as surprised by it as everyone else.  "And mayor, if there's
any chance of a bath, I'd be eternally grateful."

"Of course, most respected," Indy said.  "My daughter and her friends
can lay one on for you right away.  But---" she hesitated.  "Forgive
me asking, most respected, but what are you doing here?"

Princess Shudarga looked at her bleakly.  "Running away.  The
rebellion is over.  We lost, and the only thing we can do now is live
to fight another day."

Stale's bath house was the second largest building in the village.
One third was the men's sauna, which Noxy had only been in once, on a
dare when she was eight.  The other two thirds held half a dozen tubs
lined with carefully-fitted sheets of slate.  Each one had a small
stove built into its side, topped with a boiler capable of holding
eight large buckets of water.  A squeaky pump at one end drew water
from the long pipe that snaked through the village carrying snowmelt
from the upper pond to the laundry sluices.

Or rather, that carried snowmelt in the warm months.  Sensy worked the
pump fruitlessly a few times before giving up.  "It must have frozen
again," she told Noxy with a frown.  "But it was working a couple of
days ago, and we've had rain since then, not snow."

Noxy shrugged.  "Maybe a baby bearfrog got stuck in it again."  She
nudged a nearby bucket half-heartedly with her boot.  "You stoke, I'll
carry?"

"You carried last time," Sensy pouted.

"Fine, I'll stoke," Noxy sighed, grinning behind Sensy's back as the
other girl picked up a pair of buckets.  There was plenty of kindling
in the box by the window---it was the first thing she had looked for
when they entered---and she had always loved starting fires.

The grin slipped from her face as she laid a few dry twigs in a
criss-cross pattern and tucked a few wisps of dry moss underneath
them.  If the rebellion was over, what was going to happen to rebel
soldiers?  And more importantly, what was happening to *her*?  As much
as she wanted to believe that what had happened in the forest had just
been lightheadedness or the beginnings of a fever, she knew something
more was going on.  Was she becoming a magician like her father?  Or
was she simply going crazy?  She needed to talk to someone, but who?

Something heavy thumped on the floor behind her.  A hand clamped over
her mouth as a strong arm wrapped around her, pinning her own arms to
her sides.  A low voice spoke in her ear, its owner's lowland accent
rounding the long vowels.  "I'm not going to hurt you, respected, but
I'll need you to be keeping still."  It was the escaped ranger!

"Mmph!"  She struggled anyway, knowing it was hopeless---he was twice
her weight, and as strong as he was lean.  He stank of stale sweat,
wood smoke, and most of all of urine.  He must have been hiding in the
tanning shed, she realized, her thoughts strangely calm.  It was the
one place where Kulbinder wouldn't be able to smell him.

She bent forward and snapped her head back as hard as she could.
There was a satisfying *crack!* the back of her skull connected with
his jaw.  "Here now!" he grunted, squeezing so tightly so that she
could barely breathe.  She didn't have to escape, she realized.  She
just had to hold on until Sensy got back.  The ranger couldn't hold
onto both of them at once.

The door opened.  The ranger spun around with Noxy still in his arms,
but it wasn't Sensy---it was Thokmay and Kulbinder.

The three humans froze, but not the tiger.  He bounded forward at Noxy
and the ranger with a roar.  She shrieked as the soldier pushed her at
the tiger and snatched up a stick of kindling.  Kulbinder knocked her
aside with his shoulder and pounced on the ranger.  He shouted
something unintelligible as he went down, his makeshift club bouncing
off harmlessly off the tiger shoulder.  There was an awful *crack!* as
the back of his head hit the lip of one of the bathtubs, and then he
was still.

"Go fetch Sergeant Dorbu," Kulbinder snarled. "*Now!*"

Noxy didn't need to be told twice.  She stumbled out the door and down
the steps just in time to collide with Sensy.

"Noxy, what's wrong?"

"The---he---in there," she gasped.  "Don't go in.  The prisoner,
he---the tiger---"  She suddenly realized she was crying.  When had
that started?

Sensy set her buckets down hastily, heedless of the water that sloshed
out of them onto her boots.  She took Noxy by the shoulders.  "Are you
all right?  What happened?"

"It's the soldier," Noxy explained, wiping her face on her sleeve.
"He was hiding, but then he grabbed me, and then the tiger came at
him.  We have to get my *amma*. And, and, the sergeant, and---"

Sensy's eyes widened.  "Come on!"  She tugged Noxy's arm.  Together,
the two girls ran through the village.

It was like kicking a beehive.  Noxy wasn't even a sentence into
stammering out what had happened before Indy pulled her into a hug and
Sergeant Dorbu and Colonel Bonzon were barking orders and running back
to the bath house with the other soldiers right behind them with
swords in their hands and Aft right there with them, yelling about the
back door to the bath house, someone should go around back in case
someone tried to escape that way.  Other soldiers ran for the trading
hall and Princess Shudarga, yelling at villagers to get out of their
way.

"Oh, daffodil," Indy murmured, squeezing her daughter almost as hard
as the ranger had.  "Oh, my beautiful girl, don't scare me like that."
*It wasn't **my** fault,* Noxy thought petulantly.  But she didn't say
it.  Instead, she just snuffled into her mother's coat and tried her
best to lose herself in her mother's arms.

Dinner that night was very different from the one the night before.
Indy, Granna Fee, and Grappa Gas put on their best clothes as if it
was Ancestor's Day and they were all going to give thanks together.
The villagers cleared the big table in the middle of the trading hall
and laid it with the carved Thindi teak cutlery that Aft's
great-granna had left the village as a memorial gift a century ago.
People coated slabs of goof's milk cheese with whatever spices they
could find and threw them into pans of marinade.

Noxy, Sensy, and Rash were pressed into service to round up children,
run frantic errands, and finally as servers.  Sensy and Noxy brushed
the tangles out of each other's hair and swapped tunics with each
other, then swapped them back.  "I don't know if I can do this," Sensy
said, fighting back tears.

Noxy gave her a quick hug.  "I don't either.  But look on the bright
side---for once, we won't be stuck looking after the littles."

Six sat down to dinner, Indy and the two elders from the village and
the princess, Colonel Bonzon, and Sergeant Dorbu in uniform.  "What's
taking so long?" Noxy muttered out of the corner of her mouth.  They
were standing with their backs against the wall next to the kitchen
door, waiting awkwardly as Aft put finishing touches on the evening
meal.  He had put himself in charge of preparations as soon as the
royalist soldier was safely nailed into the tunnel with his companion.
Noxy had no idea what he was doing---like most women in the village,
she was content to leave the cooking to the men---but the smell was
making her stomach rumble.

At the table, Grappa Gas carefully poured his best black *rak* into
small glasses and passed them to the village's guests.  "To your
health," he said, raising his to toast them.

"And to yours," Princess Shudarga said, raising hers in return.  "And
to hospitality.  Finding safe haven here was the first good thing to
happen to us in quite some time."

"So what happened, most respected?" Grappa Gas asked, settling back in
his chair.  "Last we heard before the sergeant here showed up, you and
yours had the upper hand."  From where she stood, Noxy could see the
kick her mother aimed at his good leg even if the princess and the two
soldiers couldn't, but Grappa Gas didn't flinch.

The princess didn't seem to mind his directness, though Colonel Bonzon's
eyebrows gathered like a pair of bull clouds getting ready to fight.
"We did.  The people understood what we were fighting for---we were
humbled by their support.  King Denpa's men understood as well, and
more took up our banner every day.  If we had pressed a little harder,
moved a little faster..."  She shook her head, her thoughts far from
Stale's one-story wooden trading hall.

"You wanted to save lives, most respected," Colonel Bonzon said.
"There's no dishonor in that."

The corner of her mouth quirked up in a brief half-smile.  "Thank you,
colonel, but I'm long past worrying about honor.  Yes, I wanted to save
lives.  I wanted to give the king's men a chance to see that we
weren't really fighting him, we were fighting rules that have us all
in shackles, nobles and commoners alike.  I wanted to give *him* a
chance to see the justice of our cause and step aside."  She sighed.
"But all I managed to do was give our neighbors time to realize that
if the Gandani stood up, it wouldn't be long before their own people
did too.  Nyengmo, Trunggar, Lhabde... The only one that didn't send
troops was Chaghan."

Grappa Gas nodded.  "So you're going into exile?  With these as your
honor guard?"  Noxy knew the look on his face.  It was the careful
lack of expression he wore whenever they were playing *shibo* and he
had just seen a winning combination.  She wondered if the princess
knew where his sympathies lay, then kicked herself mentally.  Of
course she would---Sergeant Dorbu would have told her.

The princess smiled a proper smile this time.  "There's that word
again, 'honor'."  She set her *rak* down carefully.  "It's a a
conjurer's trick, respected Gas, just like 'tradition'.  Those with
power made it up, then convinced everyone else it was real so that
they wouldn't wonder why the rules always seemed to run against them.
So no, these men aren't my honor guard.  They are my companions, and
my equals.  They don't serve me---we serve a greater cause, together,
and will do so until everyone in the Ninety Kingdoms has the law they
deserve."

Noxy suddenly realized she was holding her breath.  Princess Shudarga
hadn't raised her voice, but somehow she had filled the whole room as
she spoke.  Beside her, Aft stood transfixed, the first plate of
grilled cheese and vegetables forgotten in his arms, his eyes as wide
as a child's.

Grappa Gas cleared his throat.  "I see.  But you *are* all going to
Chaghan together?"

"We are," Colonel Bonzon said, his own glass of *rak* untouched in front
of him.  "Along with the rest of our men."

Grappa Gas leaned back in his chair.  "Really?  How are you going to
get them through the forest?"  He jerked his chin at Sergeant Dorbu.
"That didn't go so well last time."

Colonel Bonzon shook his head.  "We're not going to go through the
forest, respected.  You're going to fly us over it."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 9: Choosing Sides

Stale woke to find itself under occupation.  Soldiers patrolled the
streets and the wall in pairs, Canaries paired with newcomers.
Villagers who ventured out were sent back to their homes, the soldiers
brushing aside protests about goofs that needed to be milked or
spiderwebs that needed to be dried and carded.

It was just a precaution, Sergeant Dorbu said, first to a stone-faced
Indy, then to an irate Grappa Gas, and then finally to the small crowd
that Colonel Bonzon finally agreed could gather in the square.  "But
just one person from each household," the sergeant had added
apologetically.  "Everyone else should stay inside for now."

"Precaution against what?" Grappa Gas demanded.  He was angrier than
Noxy had ever seen.  It wasn't the shouting rage he worked himself
into when he was arguing with his son.  This was as big as the
rainstorms that battered the mountains as autumn turned to winter.

Sergeant Dorbu looked the old man in the eye.  "Murder," he said.
"The two rangers we caught might be safely nailed up, but all it would
take is one arrow, and the rebellion really would be over.  The king's
men know that as well as we do."

"Never mind that---what's this foolishness about taking all of our
clouds?"  Where Grappa Gas's voice had been full of thunder, Granna
Fee's seemed made of iron.  She had used the same tone to explain to a
hapless soldier that just because she and Grappa Gas *happened* to be
coming out of the same house that morning *didn't* mean they were part
of the same household, and she would thank him *not* to jump to such
conclusions again.

"As the colonel said last night---" Sergeant Dorbu began.

"Some of us weren't invited last night!" one of the elders yelled.
Others murmured agreement.

"As Colonel Bonzon said last night," the sergeant continued doggedly,
"We have to get the army through to Chaghan.  We can't take them
through the Herd of Trees, not with two royalist regiments and half of
Lhabde's men blocking the entrance to the pass, so we're going to fly
them there."

"You mean *we're* going to fly them there!" Grappa Gas shouted.
"Well, rot that!  We've got *contracts*!  And even if we didn't,
there's farmers down in Gandan depending on us to bring them rain.  If
we go kiting off to wherever, folks are going to go hungry!"

"People are going hungry already."  The princess's voice cut through
the noise, instantly silencing the crowd.  Once again, Noxy wondered
if it was some strange kind of magic, or just a personality that was
three sizes larger than anyone else's.

People stepped aside to make a path for her as she walked to the
speaker's stone, nodding to Sergeant Dorbu as he stepped down to make
space for her.  She was dressed in a plain uniform jacket and kilt
without any marks of rank except the embroidered royal collar around
her neck.

The princess's gaze swept across the crowd.  "People are going hungry
every day," she said.  "And those who aren't live in fear that they
will, that someone with more money than they have will rent some law
they've never heard of and use it to take half their crop or throw
them off their land or have their house knocked down to to improve the
damned view.  You don't see it up here because you've learned to stand
together.  And that's what we need you to do now---stand together,
with us, so that we can keep fighting to put the law in your hands
where it belongs, so you can do what *you* want."

"And how in the rotting hell is that different from what you say
you're fighting?" Grappa Gas shouted, his dark face blotched with
rage.  "How's that different from the *tralpa* telling us we have to
fix up his roof for him and shear his goofs and stir some honey in his
tea because he's too damn lazy to get up out of his big fancy chair?
How much say do we get in this?"

"None," the princess said simply.  "I'm sorry, but this needs to be
done.  As soon as your fellow villagers bring your herd down from the
mountains, you're going to fly down to Duck Droppings to pick up my
men and take them through to Chaghan."

"And if we say no?" Granna Fee asked.

The whole village held its breath, waiting for the answer.  "Then we
will insist," the princess said wearily.  "I'm sorry---I truly
am---but what we are fighting for is bigger than any one village.  One
way or another, you are going to carry my army to Chaghan."

Noxy had always enjoyed math.  After watching her mother do the
village's accounts, she had pestered her grandmother into teaching her
how to add and subtract, and then multiply and divide.  When she was
nine, she had counted how many steps it took her to get from one place
to another in the village and written the numbers down in a small blue
notebook she had found in the bottom of a storage chest in the trading
hall at the end of the season.  She had even thought about becoming a
teacher like Granna Fee one day when her cloudherding days were over.

So as she walked home in silence beside Indy, she did a quick
calculation in her head.  Most of the adults had gone to round up the
village's herd of clouds.  That left about three hundred people in
Stale.  Two thirds of those were children, which meant there were no
more than a hundred villagers, versus almost able-bodied fifty
soldiers, all of whom had actually knew how to fight.  The odds would
change when the other adults came back, but Princess Shudarga was
right: she could insist, and there was nothing the Stalers could do
about it.

*Unless we run away,* she thought suddenly.  But how?  They couldn't
just walk away---the forest wouldn't let them, and with Kulbinder as a
tracker, the rebels would be able to find them in no time.  They
couldn't fly either---it would take half a dozen trips for Pillow and
Big Blue to carry everyone to safety, and they'd surely be caught
before everyone escaped.

"*Amma*," she started.

"Shush," Indy said quietly.  "We'll talk when we're home."

But they didn't.  Her mother nodded at every apprehensive villager
they passed , her best mayor's smile firmly fixed on her face, but
once they were inside and the door was closed, she slumped down at the
table and massaged her temples.  "Can you please make some tea,
daffodil?  I need to think."

"Yes, *amma*."  Noxy hefted the kettle.  Its gurgle told her that
there was enough water for two cups, so she wouldn't have to go back
out.  She stirred the embers in the stove and added a few strips of
kindling.  As she waited for the kettle to boil, she drummed her
fingers on her crossed arms.  She desperately wanted to ask her mother
what they were going to do, but it was clear that Stale's mayor didn't
know.

Someone knocked on the door.  "I'll get it," Noxy said as her mother
started to rise.

It was Sergeant Dorbu.  He had his helmet in his hands, and looked
almost as tired as Stale's mayor.  "Good morning," he said.  "May I
speak with your mother?"

Noxy stepped out of the way.  "*Amma*?" she asked.

Indy gestured at the chair across from her.  "Please," she said
woodenly.  "It's not like I can stop you."

The sergeant stood his ground.  "Yes you can.  I'm sorry that---"

"Did you know?" Indy interrupted, not bothering to try to hide the
hurt in her voice.  "When you first got here, did you know what her
plan was?"

Sergeant Dorbu shook his head.  "On my blood, I did not.  But that
doesn't matter.  I believe in her, Indy.  She's the first person since
the Pilots to stand up for people like us.  If this is what we have to
do to win, it's a small price to pay."

Indy finally looked at him.  "Easy to say when you're not the one
paying it," she said quietly.

Sergeant Dorbu was the first to look away.  "I'm sorry," he repeated.
With a nod to Noxy, he put his helmet back on his head, bowed, and
turned to leave.

Noxy closed the door as gently as she could.  "Kettle's boiled," she
said, and then she couldn't take it any more.  She rushed over and
threw her arms around her mother and buried her face in Indy's hair.
"It'll be all right," she said in a muffled voice.

Indy laughed shakily.  "I'm supposed to say that to you."  Then she
twisted around in her seat and wrapped her arms around Noxy.

Noxy remembered that cup of tea for the rest of her life.  She and her
mother talked about nothing and everything.  Should they replace the
shutter upstairs that always let in the breeze when the wind blew?
Definitely.  And had Indy ever told her daughter about the first time
someone proposed to her?  No?  Well, it was her second trip to
Nyengmo, and Grappa Gas had gone off to re-negotiate a contract for
rain, so she and two of her friends had found themselves free for an
afternoon...

Eventually Indy set her long-empty teacup aside and stretched.
"Well," she said regretfully, "I suppose I ought to go and see just
how much trouble we're in.  Why don't you head over to your granna's
and see if she needs a hand with anything?"

"All right."  Noxy stood up and put the teacups in the washbasin.
"But I'll have to make a stop on the way."

Stale's privies stood beside the tanning shed, on the theory that
everything that stank might as well be in one place.  A pair of
soldiers glanced at Noxy as she crossed the street, but said nothing.
When she was finished, she stepped back into the bright morning light
and then hesitated.  Granna Fee's was on the next street, but the
soldiers wouldn't know that, and she really wanted to talk to Sensy or
Rash or *someone* about everything that was going on.

So she turned right instead of left and walked back toward home.  As
she approached her front door, she glanced over her shoulder.  The
soldiers were still there, but were engrossed in conversation.  With a
quick sidestep, she ducked into the jitty between her house and the
neighbor's.

She stood for a moment, waiting for a shout from behind her.  None
came.  She let out her breath in a long, silent whoosh, then jumped as
a voice hissed, "What are you doing here?"

It was Thokmay.  He had been pressed against the wall---it wasn't
nearly enough to actually conceal him, but in the deep shadows that
filled the jitty, he had been just another patch of darkness.

"Me!? What are *you* doing here?" Noxy hissed back.  "Why aren't you
out there marching around with your friends?"

"They're not my friends," he said shortly.  "And they're not yours
either, not really.  Now keep quiet."  Without waiting for her angry
retort, he stepped up onto the piled-up cobblestones next to his feet
and reached into the gutter over his head.

"What are you doing?" Noxy demanded.

"Sh!"  Something clinked quietly as his fingers bumped into it.  He
cursed under his breath.

"Don't shush me!" Noxy said angrily.  "You tell me what's going on
right now, or I'm going to call the soldiers!"

"No you're not."  Noxy jumped again and spun around.  There, outlined
by the bright light from the street behind him, stood Kulbinder.  The
tiger's ears were flattened against his head, and his tail twitched
from side to side in a way that froze the breath in Noxy's lungs.

"Got it!" Thokmay whispered triumphantly.  The jitty was briefly lit
up by soft yellow light from a small piece of dayglass as he checked
his find.  Darkness returned instantly when he closed the lid on the
small metal box that held it.

"Good," rumbled the tiger.  He took a step toward Noxy.  She backed up
instinctively.  "Don't be afraid," Kulbinder said, making it sound
like a command rather than sympathy.  "We're not going to hurt you,
but we need an hour's head start, and we can't take any chances."

"Wh-what are you doing?"  Noxy asked again.  Her heart was pounding in
her chest.  She couldn't get past the tiger---she'd seen how quickly
he could run.  He'd pounce on her in an instant if she tried to knock
Thokmay down and run out the other way, and nobody was going to come
looking for her, not with the curfew.  She was trapped.

"We're going home," Thokmay said behind her.

"You're---you're deserting?"

"No." Thokmay's voice was quiet but sharp.  "We were never really
rebels in the first place."

"You're royalists?" Noxy gasped.

"He is," the tiger snorted.  "Cats don't partake of such foolishness."

"We got stuck in the middle of everything when Shudarga raised her
banner," Thokmay said.  "We went along with things as long as we
could, waiting for a chance to escape, but now we don't have a choice.
We have to reach the king's army and warn them what Shudarga is
planning."

"Warn them?  Why not just let her go?"

"Because she's not really taking her army to Chaghan," the young
soldier said impatiently.  "That's just what she's telling you all to
keep you quiet.  As soon as the clouds arrive, she's going to make you
carry her army right into the heart of Gandan.  She'll flood what she
can and put the rest to the sword."

Noxy turned to face him.  "My *amma* and the others would never do
that!" she said angrily.  "There are laws---cloudherd laws, not the
kind we have to rent from the *tralpa*.  We've never taken part in
lowlanders' wars, and we never will!"

But even in the dim light, Noxy could see the grim expression on
Thokmay's face.  "She's not going to give you a choice.  Once her
soldiers settle in, she's going to round up all of your children and
hold them hostage until you do what she wants."

Stunned, Noxy could only gape as he continued.  After dinner last
night, Princess Shudarga had talked strategy with Colonel Bonzon,
Sergeant Dorbu, and Kulbinder.  The princess had been the one to
suggest that they use the clouds to go on the offensive.  Sergeant
Dorbu had tried to talk her out of, saying that there was no way the
cloudherds would go along with.  That was when Colonel Bonzon had
proposed that they do to the cloudherds what the king had done to
them and their families.

"What did the king do?" Noxy asked, already knowing the answer.

"He rounded up the families of every officer who joined the rebels and
put them to work making arrows," Thokmay said.  "Any officer who
surrenders can take their place."

Noxy stared at him in disbelief.  "That's horrible!"

Thokmay's scowl deepened.  "He's only doing what he has to do."

"What he has to---now you sound like the princess!" Noxy thumped the
wall beside her with her fist.  "How come whatever you all do 'has to'
hurt someone else?"

"Sh!" Thokmay took a step toward her.  "The soldiers will hear you!"

"I don't---" Noxy bit back the rest of her sentence.  She wished he
had drowned in the fishpond.  No, she wished the soldiers had never
come to Stale, that the forest had devoured them or that they had
surrendered or Princess Shudarga had never rebelled in the first
place.  She wished she was riding a cloud and the only thing she had
to worry about was how long she was allowed to stay up there where she
belonged.

She wiped her face angrily.  "All right," she said.  "How do we stop
them?"

Thokmay looked at her blankly.  "What do you mean, stop them?"

"I mean how are we going to stop them?" Noxy repeated impatiently.
"The grownups will be back in two days, maybe three.  There's no way
you can get through the forest and get back here with the king's army
by then."  She raised a hand to forestall whatever Thokmay had been
about to say.  "And even if you could, they'd still have all of us as
hostages, or doesn't that matter?"

"So what do you propose we do?" the tiger asked.

Noxy's jaw set.  "Take some hostages of our own.  If we capture the
princess---"

"Hey!"  A hard voice shouted down the jitty.  "What are you lot doing
there?  Come out and show yourselves."

Noxy's heart leaped into her throat.  It was the soldiers---they'd
been found!

"It's all right, soldier, it's me," Kulbinder called out.  "I've just
found a little mouse.  I'll bring her out."

"What?" Noxy gasped.

"Just follow my lead," the tiger said quietly.  "And you," he
continued to Thokmay.  "Whatever happens, you must *not* let yourself
be seen."

"Yes, respected," Thokmay said with just a hint of sullen anger in his
voice.

Kulbinder shepherded Noxy out of the jitty.  She blinked as the bright
morning sun dazzled her eyes.  The two soldiers standing there looked
annoyed rather than angry.

"What were you doing in there?" one of them demanded, drumming his
fingers on the hilt of his sword.

"Shirking chores," Kulbinder answered before Noxy could speak.
"Apparently it's as common here as it is everywhere else."

The second soldier nudged the first.  His fingers stilled, though his
scowl didn't lighten.  "All right.  Who do you belong to?"

"She's mine," Indy said in a cold, clear voice.  She was standing in
the door with her arms crossed and a scowl twice as dark as the
soldier's on her face.  She pointed at her daughter, then beckoned her
into the house.

Noxy gulped as convincingly as she could---which wasn't hard given the
look on her mother's face---and then glanced at the tiger.  "I think
you have some explaining to do," he said meaningfully.

"Yes, respected," she said meekly.  She kept her head down as she
stepped into the house, and only jumped a tiny bit as her mother
slammed the door closed behind her.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 10: Rebellion

The first thing Indy said when Noxy finished telling her what had
happened was, "You can't tell Grappa Gas any of this---it'll throw him
right over the side."  Before Noxy could respond to that, she added,
"Or Aft.  You definitely can't tell him either.  Or your friends.  Oh,
rot."  She slumped down in her chair and swallowed a long, angry slurp
of cold tea.

"Yes, *amma*," Noxy said meekly.

Her mother banged her teacup back down on the table.  "And don't 'yes
*amma*' me.  It always makes me think you're planning something."

"Yes, *amma*," Noxy repeated in exactly the same voice.  Her mother
shot her a dark look, but then her scowl melted into limp smile.

In the end they turned to Granna Fee.  Noxy rummaged through the
pantry and packed whatever she could find into a pair of small wicker
provisions hampers while Indy drummed her fingers on the table and
thought.  Once the food was packed, they each took one and stepped out
into the mid-day light.

"For my mother," Indy explained to the first pair of soldiers they
saw, who just grunted and waved them on.  Noxy kept her head down,
telling herself over and over that nobody could actually *hear* her
heart thumping.

They passed a handful of other villagers on the short walk to Granna
Fee's.  Everyone had a destination---nobody was just out for an amble.
People greeted each other in lowered voices, but didn't stop to chat.
If soldiers were in sight, they didn't even slow down.

They had almost reached Granna Fee's before Noxy realized that she
hadn't seen or heard a single child.  Despite the warm sunlight,
Stale's elders were all keeping their grandchildren indoors.

They had to knock four times before Granna Fee answered.  When she
did, she practically dragged them inside before slamming the door
behind them.  She hugged them both, shushing their assurances that
they were all right.  "I know you are," she said crossly, her arms
still around them.  "But *I'm* not."

Her table was exactly the same size as the one in Indy and Noxy's
house.  It had been made by the same Uwsian carpenter, and been
brought back on the same cloud the summer that Indy was born.  The
nicks were in different places, though, and there was a round,
slightly shiny patch on one side that had been smoothed down by Noxy's
grandfather's elbow over the course of three decades.

Granna Fee fidgeted like a cat who smelled dinner cooking while Noxy
told her story.  "Well," she said brightly when her granddaughter
finished.  "That's going to be a problem, isn't it?"

"A problem?"  Indy and Noxy both jumped at the sound of Grappa Gas's
voice.  "A problem?  It's a rotting catastrophe!"  His wooden leg
clacked loudly on the stairs as he came thumping down dressed in a
nightshirt and fleece vest.

Granna Fee looked at Indy with something close to panic in her eyes.
"Oh, don't be silly," Indy said.  "Everybody knows."

"Knows what?" the old man growled as he kicked over a stool, then
righted it and sat down at the table.  "That this was going to be
trouble right from the start?  I *told* you---they're rebels!  If
they're going to turn on the king---the king!---why wouldn't they turn
on us?"  He banged his fist on the table, angrily shrugging off Granna
Fee's attempt to quiet him and oblivious to Noxy and Indy's amused
looks.

"Well, that's as may be," Granna Fee said, brushing back her hair and
carefully not meeting anyone's eyes.  "But we still have to decide
what we're going to do.  I mean, if they'd really take the littles
hostage..."

"I just can't believe Dorbu would do something like that," Indy
declared.  "I know we've only known him a few days, but---"

"But nothing," Grappa Gas cut in.  "He's a soldier, and he'll do what
he's told.  And if he won't, that corporal, what's his name,
Chogya---"

"Choegyal," Granna Fee corrected.

"Right, him.  If Dorbu won't do it, he will, and if *he* won't,
they'll just promote someone else."  His scowl deepened.  "Like it or
not, we're on our own."

"What about Tasteless?" Noxy asked hesitantly.  "Couldn't we---"

But the three grownups were already shaking their heads.  "I'd trust
the most respected before I'd trust him," Granna Fee said firmly.

"Well then, what about the two soldiers in the tunnel?" Noxy continued
hurriedly before anyone else could speak.  "If they escaped, it
wouldn't be our fault if they brought the king's army back, would it?"
She trailed off, uncomfortable under the adults' stares.

"That might actually work," Indy said slowly.  "And if the tiger and
his boy help us..."  She exchanged looks with Grappa Gas and Granna
Fee, both of whom nodded reluctantly.

The mayor straightened up.  "All right.  Here's what we're going to
do..."

One of Indy's favorite sayings was that no plan ever survived its
first contact with real life, and so it was that day.  Noxy never had
to use the story she'd carefully rehearsed about needing to go down to
the fishpond to collect hairy turtle eggs for dinner---the soldiers at
the main gate just waved her through.  They were equally uninterested
in her when she returned with two dozen eggs in her hamper.  "I just
need to give these to everyone," she said brightly.  One soldier
grunted.  The others ignored her completely.

The eggs were long past edible, but they gave her an excuse to walk
through the village.  No matter where she went, though, she couldn't
find Kulbinder or Thokmay.  She was starting to think that they had
already made their escape when she heard the tiger's deep voice waft
past on a breath of wind.  She looked up, and her heart sank.  He was
up on the wall with Colonel Bonzon.

She did one more lap of the village before her nerve gave out.  The
soldiers were definitely look at her the second time she passed them,
and sooner or later, someone was going to notice that she still had
all the eggs she had started with.

This time, Granna Fee opened her door at the first knock.  Noxy
quickly explained what had happened.  When she was done, Grappa Gas
shrugged.  "Just means we do it without them," he said flatly,
scratching his stump before buckling his wooden leg back on.

"But---" Granna Fee started to protest.  Grappa Gas leaned over and
kissed her before she could go any further.

"Can't be worse than that trip we did down to Bhuntshorju," he said
gently.

Granna Fee goggled at him.  "But that's when the bearfrog bit your leg
off!"

Grappa Gas grinned.  "Right.  So it can't be worse than that, can it?"

They left the house in pairs.  Grappa Gas and Granna Fee turned right
toward the tunnel where the two royalist soldiers were being held.
Noxy and her mother went left, each carrying bundles of twigs taken
from the communal kindling pile outside Granna Fee's back door.  A few
more people were out, but the first time someone stopped to talk to
the mayor, a nearby soldier cleared his throat meaningfully and shook
his head.

"Keep your head down," Indy muttered.  "If you don't look them in the
eyes, they won't bother you."  Noxy nodded jerkily, making a mental
note to find out when and where her mother had learned that.

They reached the burned-out storage shed without incident.  They were
in luck---no one was was in sight.  While Noxy kept watch, her mother
ducked into the shed, untied her twigs, and quickly laid them in a
cross-hatch pattern.

"Still wet?" she asked her daughter.  Noxy nodded and passed her the
second bundle.  They had torn Grappa Gas's night shirt into strips,
soaked the pieces, and woven them through the twigs.  Noxy had been
afraid the whole way over that one of the soldiers would notice that
her bundle was dripping.

Indy laid the second bundle on top of her pile, then pulled a few
scraps of fire paper out of the top of her sock and tucked them in
among the twigs.  A flint and steel sparker materialized out of the
other sock and made a scraping sound as she twisted it.  Once, twice,
a third time, and a tiny dot of heat landed on the paper and caught.

Stuffing the sparker back in her sock, Indy leaned forward and
breathed gently on the spark.  It brightened and spread, eating a
bright-edged hole in the fire paper.  A moment later the twigs'
needles were alight, and then the twigs themselves.

"Come on," Indy said.  Noxy didn't need to be told twice.  A quick
look around the edge of the door told her that the coast was
clear.  She and her mother hurried away.

They were halfway between Granna Fee's and the makeshift tunnel prison
when they heard the first shout.  Noxy didn't dare look, but at a
second shout, Indy glanced over her shoulder, frowning, then crossed
the street to where a pair of soldiers were standing.  "Excuse me, do
you know what's happening?" she asked.

The soldiers shook their heads.  "No idea, respected," said the one
Noxy recognized as a Canary.

Indy's frown deepened.  "Wonderful," she said, her tone making it sound
anything but.  "I *am* still mayor, you know, and it would be nice if
people told me what was going on in my own village."

"I'm sorry, respected," the soldier said helplessly.  "I don't---"

A shrill whistle cut him off.  "Excuse me," he said.  His partner was
already jogging back the way Indy and Noxy had come.  The Canary
ducked his head and followed him.

This time Noxy risked a look.  A twist of gray smoke was climbing into
the air.  It thickened even as she watched.  *That'll be the rak,* she
thought.  Granna Fee hadn't been happy about sacrificing two whole
bottles of the thick, dark liquid, but she had been right about how
well it would burn.

She and her mother rounded the corner.  Noxy's heart sank.  There were
no soldiers in sight, but Aft was standing in front of the tunnel
mouth, hands on hips and nose to nose with his father.  Granna Fee was
frantically trying to get between them, but the two angry men were
having none of it.

"And *I* want to know what you're doing out when there's a curfew!"
Aft spat angrily.

"Don't take that tone with me, boy." Grappa Gas raised the hammer he
was holding and shook it at him.

Aft knocked the hammer away.  They were just about to start scuffling
when Indy said, "Stop it, both of you!"

Grappa Gas lowered the hammer.  Aft lowered his fists.  Indy lowered
her voice.  "What are you *thinking*?  The last thing we need is you
two butting heads like a couple of goofs!"

"Well then you should remind this buckethead whose side he's supposed
to be on," Grappa Gas snapped, unabashed.  He glanced over his son's
shoulder at the two prisoners, who were watching the proceedings with
unconcealed amusement.  "Playing soldier when his own people are
afraid to be out of their homes---it's a disgrace, that's what it is!"

"*I'm* a disgrace?"  Aft threw up his hands in disgust, almost
clouting Granna Fee on the chin by accident.  "*You're* the one
creeping around like some sort of thief.  Or were you planning to use
that hammer to dig up some daffodils?"

"Stop it!" Indy repeated sharply.  "Now listen to me---no, listen, not
talk."  She quickly explained what Noxy had heard and what they had
decided to do.

His face hardened as she spoke.  "I don't believe it," he said flatly
when she finished.  "The most respected is on *our* side---on
everyone's side.  She wouldn't do something like that."

"So do you think I just made it up?" Noxy demanded angrily.

Aft shook his head.  "I don't think *you* are.  But what about the
tiger?  All we have is his word, and we have no idea what game he's
playing."  He jerked his thumb over his shoulder.  "Until we've got
something better than that, these two are staying right here."

"Why, you---" Grappa Gas stepped toward him, raising the hammer once
again.

This time it was Indy who stepped between them.  "That's *enough*!"
The scowl on her face was the same one she wore when someone cooked
something with cilantro, and she had to eat it to be polite.  "He's
right.  No, he's right," she continued, raising a hand to Grappa Gas.
"We need some way to check the tiger's story before we do anything
foolish."

She rounded on Aft.  "But your father is right too.  You shouldn't be
here doing the soldiers' work.  If they think they can set us against
each other, we're done for.  So we're *all* going to go home now, is
that understood?  We'll try to find out what's actually going on, and
until we do, we'll leave the soldiering to the soldiers."

Aft clenched and unclenched his fists.  "Fine," he said.  "But we all
leave together."

"Fine," Grappa Gas said in an equally disgusted voice.  With a mock
bow, he waved his son ahead of him.

The five villagers walked back up the street in silence.  At the first
corner, Aft grunted something that might have been, "Bye," and turned
toward his home.

Grappa Gas only made it another dozen steps before bursting out, "I
can't believe it!  You're the mayor, Indy, the *mayor*!  You shouldn't
let him talk back to you like that!"

"It seemed like the simplest thing," Indy said lightly.

Grappa Gas glanced at her.  "What are you grinning about?" he asked
suspiciously.

Indy looked at her mother, who was wearing an identical grin.  Granna
Fee spread her hands.  "Dear me," she said innocently.  "I seem to
have misplaced my hammer.  I suppose I must have dropped it while you
two big strong goofs were shouting at each other."

Grappa Gas gaped at her, then at Indy, and then started to laugh.

They ate dinner together, telling stories they'd all heard before but
enjoying them nonetheless.  Indy and Noxy walked home arm in arm as
the sun was setting, still smiling.  Indy even waved at a couple of
soldiers and wished them a good evening, though her expression froze
when she caught sight of Sergeant Dorbu in the distance.  They made
small talk as they washed their faces, changed into their night
shirts, and went to bed.  Noxy read a few pages by the yellow light of
her little shard of dayglass, but gave up and set her book aside the
third time she realized it had fallen closed in her hands.

She dreamed of clouds that night, of clouds flying free and of the
forest brooding below them.  Snowflakes tickled as they fell through
her, and the north wind felt like drinking an endless cold glass of
water.  She shouted for joy, then woke and realized that the shouts
were real, and not hers.

"*Amma*?" she called out blearily.  "*Amma*, what's going on?"  She
shrugged into the scratchy woollen sweater that Sensy had knit for her
as a Yearagain Eve present and stumbled downstairs.

Her mother was peering out the half-open front door.  She shushed Noxy
as her daughter joined her.  Four soldiers jogged by outside, swords
in their hands.  She heard Sergeant Dorbu shouting orders somewhere
nearby, telling someone to double-check the bath house and someone
else to make sure Colonel Bonzon had men searching the ridge above the
cloud pen, they could be hiding there waiting for daylight.

"Did they escape?" Noxy whispered anxiously.

"They must have," her mother whispered back.  "Stay here."  Before
Noxy could protest, Indy slipped out through the door.

Noxy hesitated only a moment before following her.  "Wait!" she
hissed.

Her mother spun around.  "Get back in the house!" she ordered.  "It's
not safe out here!"

Noxy crossed her arms.  "Well if it's not safe, you shouldn't be here
either, should you?"

Indy glared at her, but whatever she might have said next was cut off
by a sharp, "You! Hold!"

It was Sergeant Dorbu.  He jogged up the street to stop in front of
them with two of his men at his heels.  "Respected mayor, I need to
ask you to return to your home."

Indy snorted.  "That's what I was just telling *her*.  What's going
on?  Are we being attacked?"

The sergeant shook his head.  "No, respected.  The prisoners have
escaped somehow."  He searched her face.  "You wouldn't know anything
about that, would you?"

This time it was Indy who crossed her arms.  "To tell you the truth, I
don't want to know anything about any of this any more," she replied
flatly.

Sergeant Dorbu looked away.  "I'm sorry, respected," he said.  "I
truly am.  But please---go back to your house and let us deal with
this."

Just then an angry voice bellowed, "Let *go* of me, or I swear I'm
going to knock you into next Bluesday!"  Two soldiers came around the
corner holding a furiously-struggling Aft between them.  Two others
marched alongside with heavy wooden cudgels in their hands.  All four
were newcomers, and all four looked as angry as Aft.

Indy rounded on Sergeant Dorbu.  "What in the names of all the saints
is going on here?" she demanded.

Sergeant Dorbu had already stepped into the middle of the road.
"Halt!" he said.  "Where are you taking this man, and on whose order?"

The soldiers halted.  One of the cudgel wielders thumped his chest in
salute.  "Colonel Bonzon's orders, sergeant.  We found a hammer in the
tunnel where the prisoners were being held.  Only time it could have
gotten there was when this man was guarding them on his ownsome."

Noxy's hand flew to her mouth.  Her mother's eyes widened.  She looked
at Aft in shock.  The expression his face said that he knew full well
how the hammer had gotten there.  He bared his teeth, and for a
heartbeat Noxy was sure he was going to say something.  Instead, he
snapped his head to the side, cracking his forehead against the nose
of one of the soldiers holding him.  "I said let *go* of me, you
rag-eared stack of goof dung!"

A sudden cudgel blow knocked the wind out of him.  He sagged,
wheezing, then made a sound that could only be described as a growl
and tried to straighten up.  The soldier who had hit him pushed the
end of his cudgel up against Aft's throat.  "Nuh uh," he cautioned.
"Not unless you want another one."

As the four soldiers hauled him away, Aft shot one more look at Indy
and the sergeant.  Noxy couldn't honestly have said which he seemed
angrier at, or which he thought had betrayed him the worst.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 11: Flight

Stale woke up sullen and angry the next morning.  The tentative
goodwill that had been growing between the villagers and the Angry
Canaries had evaporated as word of Aft's incarceration spread across
backyard fences and in lowered voices as people milked goofs,
collected eggs from chicken coops, and took care of other essential
chores as quickly as they could.  Everyone moved with a sense of quiet
urgency, as if preparing for an early autumn blizzard.

Noxy was only half surprised when she interrupted Rash and Sensy in
the jitty between their parents' houses.  Her mother had sent her to
check and make sure Rash's grappa was all right---his mind had started
wandering during the winter, and she hadn't seen him the day before.
Head down, she almost walked past the jitty, but a quiet, "Uh oh!"
caught her ear.  She looked up and saw her two best friends standing
there, still holding hands, Rash looking embarrassed and Sensy
defiant.  She stared at them and they stared back until Noxy's mind
caught up with her eyes and she said, "Um, how's your grappa doing?"

Rash cleared his throat.  "Fine.  He's sleeping a lot, but he's fine."

Noxy nodded.  "Good."  And then she repeated, "Good," putting all the
certainty she didn't feel into her voice before setting the small box
of food she was carrying on his house's stoop and turning around to go
home.

She barely saw the soldiers she passed on the way.  Kulbinder's deep
voice from around the next corner brought her back to the world.  "Of
course, respected, as soon as he's back, but I---"

"And when will that be?" Colonel Bonzon interrupted sharply.  "the
most respected wants to review *all* her troops, *today*, whether it's
convenient for them or not."

Noxy glanced over her shoulder.  The nearest soldiers were three
houses away, and looking in the other direction.  Heart suddenly
pounding, she put her foot up on the steps of the nearest house and
bent over as if tying her bootlace.

"Of course, respected," Kulbinder replied calmly.  "He should be back
this afternoon.  If you would like, I could go to fetch him right
now."

"Do that," the colonel ordered.  "And make sure he's presentable.  The
most respected is *not* happy about you letting the prisoners get
away, and having your boy show up looking like an unwashed beggar will
*not* improve her mood."

"Understood, respected."

Noxy kept her head bent as the colonel's bootsteps faded into the
distance, then jumped when Kulbinder padded around the corner and
asked, "Did you catch all of that?"

"A-all of what?" she asked, straightening up.

"My conversation with the good colonel," the tiger said impatiently.
His tail twitched.  "He wants Thokmay to be in his little parade this
afternoon for the most respected, but we can't let that happen."

"Why not?"

The tiger's tail twitched again.  He seemed to reach a decision.  "Go
home," he ordered.  "Put as much food as you can in a small
bag---dried fruit, cheese, a blanket, whatever else you need for
travel.  Meet me back here in half an hour, and don't tell anyone
except the mayor what it's for."  Before Noxy could say that she
couldn't tell anyone because she didn't know herself, the tiger
trotted away.

Her mother wasn't home when Noxy got there.  She dithered for a few
dozen heartbeats, torn between common sense and the need to do
something---anything, so long as it wasn't sitting and waiting for who
knew what.  Then she muttered, "Stop being stupid," and grabbed the
travel pack that Indy and Granna Fee had given her as a Yearagain
present that winter.  It was made of dark blue canvas, with a light
blue lining infused with wax to keep things dry.  She had spent New
Year's morning wrapped in a blanket in front of the stove, daydreaming
about what her first cloudherding trip would be like as she explored
its pockets, flaps, and ties, completely oblivious to her mother and
grandmother's fond looks.

Cheese, dried fruit, a hard bread called *nak* that had to be soaked
in tea before it could be chewed (and even then, there was always a
risk of cracking a tooth)... Her little shard of dayglass, carefully
wrapped in a thick pair of socks, went in on top, and then the little
doctressing kit that Indy always kept at hand.  She hefted the pack to
check its weight, shrugged into her coat, and hurried out the door.

It wasn't until she passed the first pair of soldiers that she
realized she had no way of explaining why she was so obviously dressed
for travel.  What would she say?  How would she explain the supplies
in her pack, never mind the heavy work knife tucked hanging from her
belt?  She had put it on without a second thought, not thinking until
just now that anyone who didn't know how much hard work cloudherding
was, it would look like a weapon, not a tool.

She crossed the narrow street and picked up a pot full of greenflags
that someone had set out as a springtime decoration.  The ragged
rectangular blooms had started to wilt, but if anyone asked she would
say that she was, she was, she didn't know what but she'd think of
something.

Kulbinder was nowhere to be seen when she reached the corner where
they'd spoken.  She set the pot down and wiped her forehead with her
sleeve, only half-pretending to be out of breath.  The pot was heavier
than it looked, and her coat was too warm for heavy work.

"Psst!  Over here!"  Thokmay beckoned to her from a jitty on the other
side of the street.  Leaving the pot where she'd set it down, she
crossed the street and stepped into its shadows.

"Is that all you brought?" he asked, looking at her pack.

Noxy bristled.  "That's all anyone ever takes."

"And I thank you for it," the tiger rumbled from behind her.

Noxy whirled around.  "Stop *doing* that!" she hissed.

The tiger blinked.  "Doing what?"

"Sneaking up on people!  I almost---oh, never mind.  Here."  She
turned back to Thokmay and opened the pack, anger making her fingers
clumsy.  "There's bandages and burn salve, and a bit of dayglass in
the socks---it's probably got about a couple of hours in it, but it's
not very bright.  The rest is food."

She re-tied the pack and held it out to Thokmay.  As he reached out to
take it, a gruff voice said, "Hold there!"

Noxy whirled around again.  There in the entrance to the jitty stood
one of the princess's soldiers, his sword in his hand.  Another
soldier stood behind him.

Kulbinder growled as the first soldier took one step forward.  "Easy
there, respected," the soldier said, patting the air with his free
hand.  "Easy there..."

"What is the meaning of this?" the tiger snarled.

"I was going to ask you the same question."  A chill ran up Noxy's
spine at the cold threat in the speaker's voice.  The second soldier
was Colonel Bonzon.

"No!" Thokmay said to Kulbinder from behind her, but it was too late.
The tiger bounded forward and threw himself at the hapless soldier,
knocking the soldier's sword aside with one swipe of his paw.

His full weight hit the soldier in the chest.  Shouting a curse, the
soldier tumbled backward into Colonel Bonzon.  "With me!" the tiger
roared, lunging at the first of two more soldiers behind the colonel.
"Now!"

"Go!" Thokmay shouted, shoving Noxy forward.  "Go go go!"  Then they
were running, out of the jitty and into the street where the first
soldier and Colonel Bonzon were already back on their feet and another
soldier was down on his knees, clutching his bloodied hand while his
partner swung at the tiger.  Kulbinder ducked under the blow and spun
around to knock the colonel off his feet again, roaring, "Run, boy,
run!"

Noxy and Thokmay ran.  Down the street, around the corner to---no,
there were soldiers there, drawing their swords at the sound of
shouting.  "This way!"  Noxy dodged around Thokmay and ducked into the
jitty beside Rash's house.  Her boots splashed in a puddle and she was
back in daylight, still running, the pack bouncing on her shoulder.

"What---?" squawked an elder as Noxy plowed into her, knocking her
armload of dried moss into the air.

"Sorry!" Noxy shouted over her shoulder.  There!  She took the steps
to the bath house two at a time, yanked the door open, said, "Excuse
me!" to the two half-dressed old men who gaped at her and Thokmay,
yanked the back door open, and slammed it shut behind them.

"We have to get outside the walls," Thokmay panted.

"What do you think I'm trying to do!?" Noxy snapped, equally out of
breath.  She pointed at the pile of firewood stacked against the side
of the bath house.  "Up that."

The quartered logs and kindling shifted under their feet as they
clambered up the woodpile.  Thokmay grabbed the bath house gutter and
tested it with his weight before pulling himself up onto the roof.
Noxy had just pulled herself up behind him when the door burst open.

She froze, not even daring to breathe.  "Clear back here!" a soldier
called.

"I *told* you we didn't see anyone," quavered an elderly voice from
inside the bath house.  The door slammed shut beneath her.

Noxy realized she was shaking.  She looked over at Thokmay, who was
standing with his boots on the gutter and his body pressed against the
steep shingled roof.  "What now?" he hissed.

*Doom doom!*  *Doom doom!*  Stale's home drum echoed off the ancient
fortress walls.  "Oh, wonderful," Noxy muttered.

"What *now*?" Thokmay hissed again.

"I'm thinking!" Noxy snapped.  But even as she said it, an idea took
shape.  She closed her eyes and reached with her mind.

"What are you doing?" Thokmay demanded.  "We have to get moving!"

"Just wait!"  There!  Her lips moved, then she opened her eyes.  "Come
on!"

Children were absolutely, positively *not* allowed on the village's
roofs, which of course meant that Noxy and her friends had found a
dozen opportunities to do just that.  The trick was to walk sideways
like a rock crab, using your hands like an extra pair of feet, and to
not look down, especially not in those heart-stopping moments when one
house ran out and you had to stand up straight and run for a couple of
steps and leap across a jitty to the next roof.

Noxy kept them close to the south wall, out of sight of the other
three, but even so, every moment she expected to hear someone yell,
"There they are!" from above them.  They froze once at the sound of
shouting below them, but it was just a soldier ordering some villagers
back into their home.  They froze again when Noxy's foot hit a loose
shingle and sent it skittering over the roof's edge to land in a
bucket or barrel with a quiet *sploosh!* that only they noticed.  Then
they were moving again, hands and coats and knees made filthy by
scraping against damp muck and moss, legs starting to tremble from the
strain.

It felt like it took forever to reach the end of the row of houses,
though it was probably only a couple of minutes.  The stairs to the
Quick Tower were close enough to jump to, but only just---Noxy had
managed it, but any bragging she might have done had been silenced by
Rash's broken leg.  And she hadn't been wearing a pack at the time.

She tightened its straps.  "Just follow me," she told Thokmay.  Before
her nerve could fail, she straightened up, took three long steps, and
threw herself across the gap to the stairs.

The toe of her right boot clipped the side of the steps.  She tumbled
forward onto the stone, cracking her knee, and scrambled to her feet
just in time to see Thokmay land sure-footed on the step below.

"There they are!"  This time the shout wasn't in her
imagination---they had been spotted!

"Come one!" she yelled.  She sprinted up the steps, desperately hoping
that no one was waiting for her at the top, that the soldiers were all
busy hunting for them down below, that---

Her hopes were half answered.  The soldiers weren't at the top of the
steps---they were halfway along the wall, but they had bows, and the
princess was with them.  Her mouth fell open as they drew and aimed at
her.  *They're going to shoot me!* she thought stupidly.

"Hold!" the princess ordered, raising her hand.  Then Thokmay reached
the top of the stairs and her eyes widened in surprise.  "Prince
Thokmay?  What are *you* doing here?"

He didn't get a chance to answer.  *Twang!* A bottle of *rak* with a
burning rag stuff in its neck flew through the air and shattered
against the stones just a few strides from Princess Shudarga.  "Stick
*my* son in a cage, will you?" Grappa Gas bellowed, loading a second
bottle into his slingshot as the first burst into flame.

One of the archers let fly.  His arrow thunked into the window frame a
handspan from Grappa Gas's head just as the old man loosed his second
shot.  *Twang!* The bottle shattered next to the first, sending a
fresh burst of flame into the air.

"What are you waiting for!?" Grappa Gas yelled.  "Go! Go! Go!"

Noxy's arms and legs unfroze.  Grabbing Thokmay by the arm, she turned
and ran along the parapet.  Behind them, soldiers leaped through the
flames and gave pursuit, shouting for help.

An arrow flew past her with a sound like someone blowing breath in her
ear.  She shrieked and kept running.  *Thunk!* Another suddenly
sprouted from the wooden steps of the firewatch tower in front of her.
*Thunk!* A second one hit beside the first.  They were warning
shots---the archers could hit them any time they wanted.  But it was
too late to think about that.  She took the firewatch tower steps two
at a time, grabbed the rope lying coiled at the base of the flagpole,
and heaved it over the wall.

The rope burned her hands as she slid down.  It didn't reach the
ground, not nearly, but there was nothing she could do about that
now.  She let go.  For one sickening heartbeat she was falling.  Then
the ground punched her feet and her knees folded up and her backside
hit the ground hard enough to jar her teeth but she was all right, she
could roll to the side and stand as Thokmay slithered down the rope
and landed beside her with a thump and a curse.

"Let's go!" she said, grabbing his arm again.

"No!"  He shook her off.  "I'm not leaving without Kulbinder."

"There they are!" someone shouted from the wall above them.  She
looked up to see a soldier pointing at her.  Her heart sank at an
answering shout from around the corner of the wall.

"Come *on*!" she yelled.  Thokmay swallowed another curse and followed
her.

Branches slapped at their faces as they crashed down the narrow,
twisting path through the forest.  Shouts behind them were answered by
others ahead---the princess's soldiers were already at the cloud pen.

Noxy pulled up short.  "Wait!" she ordered, raising a hand to quiet
Thokmay before he could speak.  She closed her eyes and reached with
her mind again.  There!

She opened her eyes.  "This way," she pointed.  She pushed through a
patch of fangberry, ignoring the tiny flowers as they snapped and
snarled at her, and slid down the steep slope toward the mouth of the
cloud pen canyon.

The forest stopped abruptly just a few strides short of the dropoff.
As they burst out of the trees, the only things that stood between
them and the edge of the canyon were a few snowberry bushes, a fallen
tree that someone had rolled into place to use as a bench, and
Sergeant Dorbu with a panting pair of soldiers with swords drawn.

Thokmay and Noxy skidded to a halt.  The sergeant raised his hands.
"Easy there," he said, as if calming a frightened horse.  "Easy...  No
one's going to hurt you.  We just---"

Kulbinder burst out of the trees behind them with a roar.  The
bleeding gash on his flank and the matching cut on his skull only made
him more terrifying.  He threw himself at the soldiers as Sergeant
Dorbu cursed and drew his sword.  One swipe of his paw, and the first
soldier was on the ground.  The second soldier's blade whistled over
his head.  Another quick swipe and the second soldier was down beside
the first, clutching the fresh wounds on his calf.

"Stop!  Kulbinder, stop!" Sergeant Dorbu shouted, hefting his sword.

The tiger stalked forward one pace, then another, his tail twitching.
"Put it down, sergeant," he growled.

Sergeant Dorbu shook his head.  "I can't do that."  He set his feet in
a fighter's stance and raised his blade.

"Wait!"  Noxy threw herself between them.  "Just wait!"

"Out of the way, girl," the tiger growled.

Noxy shook off Thokmay's hand.  "Just wait," she repeated.

"We can't!" Thokmay shouted.  "If we stay here they'll catch us!"

"We're not staying here," Noxy said.  And then she grabbed his arm and
pulled him with her as she jumped off the cliff.

They both screamed as they fell.  One, two, three... Big Blue dimpled
under their weight as they landed on the cloud.  The impact knocked
the wind out of Noxy.  She rolled over and struggled to her knees just
in time to be tumbled onto her back again as Kulbinder hit the cloud
just a stride from its flank.  She caught a momentary glimpse of
Sergeant Dorbu staring in disbelief as Big Blue rose into the sky to
carry them away.

"Are you mad!?" the tiger demanded.  "You could have killed him!"

"You're welcome," Noxy spat back.  She shrugged out of the pack and
threw it down beside Thokmay, who was still struggling to get to his
feet.  "Now shut up and let me steer."  *And please don't ask how I
mind-spoke to the cloud from so far away,* she added silently.

The net across the cloud pen entrance was half-open, just as Big Blue
had told her.  Pillow and the big cloud that Tasteless had arrived on
circled nervously as Big Blue flew through it.  *North,* Noxy told
him.  *Go fast.*  As the wind of their passage began to strengthen,
she opened her eyes and turned to Thokmay and Kulbinder.  The young
man had pulled bandages out of her pack to press against the wound on
the tiger's flank.

"So," she said.  "Would you like to tell me what's really going on?
And don't say, 'What do you mean?', because I heard what the princess
said.  She called you 'Prince Thokmay'."

The tiger and his boy exchanged looks.  The tiger blinked first.
"Probably Noxious of Stale Leftovers," he said formally, "Allow me to
introduce you to the most respected Prince Thokmay, heir to the throne
of Gandan."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 12: Abandoned

Noxy burst out laughing.  "Seriously?" she gasped.  "You expect me to
believe that---" And then she started laughing again.

Thokmay and Kulbinder waited patiently for her to get her hysteria
under control.  When she didn't, Thokmay shrugged and began dabbing
the blood on the tiger's flank again.  "I told you," he muttered.  The
tiger closed his eyes and flicked an ear, but said nothing.

Noxy finally wound down.  She felt lightheaded, as if she had woken up
too early from a mid-afternoon nap.  She wrapped her arms around
herself and shivered.  "Really?" she asked.  "You're really a prince?"

Thokmay nodded without looking up.  "Really.  Most noble families send
their children out into the world in disguise for a couple of years so
that they can see what life is like beyond the palace walls.  My
mother was a carpenter's apprentice when she was my age."

He rolled up the blood-soaked bandage and set it down beside him.
"Not on the cloud," Noxy said automatically.  "It spooks them."

"Sorry."  Thokmay stuffed it into the sleeve of his uniform jacket
as if it were a handkerchief.  "Anyway, my father's spymaster was
already suspicious of Princess Shudarga, and wanted to send one of his
agents to have a closer look, so..."  He shrugged again.  "Here we
are."

"So you're a spy as well as a prince?" Noxy asked disbelievingly.

The corner of Thokmay's mouth twitched.  "Not me.  *He's* the spy."
He patted Kulbinder's flank.

"At your service," the tiger rumbled without opening his eyes.  "Now
can we please get on with it?"

There was a needle and some cotton thread in with the bandages, and a
small knife with a very sharp blade.  The prince trimmed the hair
around Kulbinder's wound as short as he could, then put in three
stitches.  Noxy almost threw up the first time he pushed the needle
into the tiger's flesh, but other than twitching his tail, Kulbinder
showed no sign that he even felt it.

When it was over with, Thokmay splashed some water on his hands and
wiped as much blood as he could onto the bandage, careful not to let
any drip on the cloud.  "You look like you've done that before," Noxy
said.

"I guess."  Thokmay looked at the distant peaks.  "I wanted to learn
to be a doctress, not a soldier, but my father said that the men in
our family have always spent their foster years in the army."

"A doctress?"  Noxy blinked.  "Men can't be doctresses."

"Sure they can," Thokmay said defensively.  "Lots of men are
doctresses.  Well, maybe not *lots*, but..."  He shrugged yet again.
"Anyway, that's yesterday's breakfast now.  Once we're back in Gandan,
I'm going to---"

"We're not going to Gandan," Noxy interrupted, crossing her arms.
"We're going up into the mountains.  I'm going to find the grownups
and tell them what's happened and let them decide what to do next.
And don't tell me 'I have to' or anything like that," she added as the
prince opened his mouth.  "Not unless you've suddenly learned how to
mind-speak with clouds, because this one isn't going *anywhere* unless
I tell him to."

She kept her arms crossed through the shouting and somewhat weakened
roaring that followed.  She had to take them to Gandan because only
the royal army could rescue her fellow villagers.  She had to because
if the cloudherds tried to take on Princess Shudarga's troops they'd
be slaughtered.  Because the prince commanded her to.  Because the
*tiger* commanded her.

"I don't 'have to' anything!" she shouted back when her temper finally
snapped.  "If my mother or my granna were here, I'd do whatever they
told me.  Or maybe Grappa Gas---*maybe*---but that's about it.  Like I
said, unless you've magically learned how to cloudherd, we're going to
go and find some grownups.  Now how about both of you shut up for a
little while and let me steer this cloud?  Because all this shouting
is scaring him, and if he decides to drop you, I'm not going to even
*try* to stop him!"

It took her a moment to realize that Kulbinder's wheezing was actually
a chuckle.  "What!?" she demanded.

"You would have made a fine rhinoceros," he said.

"What's a rhinoceros?" she asked suspiciously.

They flew in silence after that, Thokmay next to Kulbinder and Noxy
cross-legged a few strides away.  She was so lost in her own thoughts
and fears that it wasn't until a stray snowflake snagged on her
eyebrow that she realized a storm was coming around the corner of the
pass up ahead.

She swore under her breath as she stood and flexed her foot, which had
gone to sleep, and shaded her eyes with her hand.  They were nimbus
clouds, she realized, her heart sinking.  Big ones, swollen with a
full winter's grazing on the snowfields of the high Brumosos.  If it
was just a few weeks later, her mother would have the villagers up on
their clouds to guide them south to bring much-needed rain to farmers'
fields in the Ninety Kingdoms.  She had no chance of doing that on her
own---no chance of doing anything except get out of their way or go
under them and hope she didn't spook them.

"Get the blanket," she said to Thokmay, belatedly adding, "Most
respected.  Tuck it in around Kulbinder---it isn't much, but it's all
we have to keep him warm."

"How bad is it going to get?" Thokmay asked, reaching for the pack.

"Bad enough," Noxy replied grimly.

It wasn't bad---it was worse.  The bulls at the front of the herd were
still fighting for leadership.  Every butt and shove threw a flesh
flurry of snow into the air.  The cows and calves behind them picked
up on their agitation and shed snow of their own, until the air was a
soup of wet white flakes whipped every which way by gusts of wind.

The three travellers were soaked in minutes and shivering soon after.
"We'll freeze if we don't get out of this!" Thokmay said, shouting to
be heard.

"I know!"  Noxy shouted back.  "But I don't know how big this herd
is---it could stretch halfway to Chaghan!"

"Then let's turn around!"

She shook her head.  "We can't outrun them!" she said, not sure it was
true but not wanting there to be a reason to head toward Gandan.
"We'll have to set down!"

"But then we'll just freeze on the ground!" the prince protested.

"No we won't.  There's a place up ahead where we can get shelter."  *A
place I wanted to never visit again,* she added to herself grimly, but
it looked like they were out of choices.

Three Springs Canyon was a narrow cut between two brooding mountains
whose names Noxy had never learned.  In summer, the stream that ran
through it was full of diver bees, rock crabs, the stealthy squiddles
that hunted them both, and the occasional bear or troll with a taste
for fresh squiddle.  But summer hadn't come yet, so the dancing water
Noxy was familiar with was instead an angry torrent.  Fog from the hot
springs that gave the canyon its name drifted in the air like scraps
of wool, chilling the already-freezing travellers.

"How can you see in this?" Thokmay asked as a spur of rock suddenly
appeared out of the mist.

"I can't," Noxy said curtly.  "But *he* can."  She patted Big Blue.
"Now shush."  In truth, the cloud she was steering could barely see
further ahead than she could, and wasn't happy about it.

*Home,* Big Blue pleaded.

*Soon,* Noxy mind-spoke back, putting all the comfort and certainty
she didn't feel into her thoughts.  *Soon.*

The air cleared almost instantly once they were past the last hot
spring.  Behind them, the storm still raged in the canyon, but none of
the clouds had turned away from the herd to follow them.  Noxy pulled
her coat tighter around her, eyeing the shivering prince.  "How's he
doing?" she asked, jerking her chin at Kulbinder.

"He needs to be somewhere warm.  And dry."  Thokmay stroked the
tiger's flank.  Kulbinder's tail twitched, but he didn't open his
eyes.  "Wherever you're taking us, I hope we're there soon."

As Noxy opened her mouth to reply, a trickle of smoke stung her
nostrils.  She got to her feet.  "There," she said, pointing.  "We'll
be able to set down there."

'There' was a one-room hut perched on a not-quite-level shoulder of
the canyon.  Its walls were made of piled stones with moss and clay in
the chinks to keep the wind out, and its roof was slats overlain with
branches.  There were no windows, and a bamboo tube with a shingle cap
served as as chimney.  If not for the thin wisp of smoke rising into
the air, Noxy would have said it had been abandoned years ago.  Even
with that, part of her hoped that it had...

Big Blue descended gingerly into the cul de sac beneath the hut and
pressed himself against the mountain.  With Thokmay gently urging him
on, Kulbinder struggled to his feet and limped off the cloud and
picked his way uphill through the loose stones and patches of unmelted
snow.  Noxy followed them, the travel pack over her shoulder.

"Hello?" Thokmay called.  "Is anyone there?"  Silence.  "Is anyone
there?" he repeated more loudly.

Suddenly impatient, Noxy strode past him and knocked on the door.
"Hello the house!" she called out, not waiting for an answer before
lifting the little latch and pulling it open.

It was empty.  The dying embers of the morning's fire still glowed in
the little brick fireplace beneath the chimney, and a piece of
yellow-orange dayglass hadn't quite shed the last of the previous
day's sunlight.

Noxy wrinkled her nose at the heavy, unwashed smell of someone who had
done no more through the freezing winter than splash a bit of water on
his face and dab at his armpits.  "Come on in," she said, half glad
and half disappointed and trying to hide both.  She yanked some
blankets off the narrow cot on one side of the hut and made a quick
pile in front of the fireplace.  "Put him down there.  I'll get some
more wood."

Thokmay hesitated, clearly wanting to ask questions, then nodded and
began trying to make Kulbinder comfortable.  Noxy stepped around him
and went back outside.  As soon as she was around the corner, she
sagged against the wall and wiped her eyes.  She had no idea what she
would have said if the hut's resident had been there, but judging from
the fire, she was going to have to think of something soon.

Noxy gathered an armload of the driest wood she could find and carried
it back inside.  Thokmay watched in silence as she stacked it beside
the fireplace, then used her knife to shave some long splinters from
one piece and laid them on the embers.  When they began to smolder,
she added a few more shavings, and finally the whole piece of wood.
The warm smell of burning pine slowly filled the hut.

Thokmay stirred.  "Thank you," he said quietly.

"You're welcome... most respected."  Noxy tossed some scraps of bark
on the fire as she added the last phrase.

"I'm sorry for not telling you sooner," the prince said.  "But we
didn't know who we could trust."

"Did the soldiers know?" Noxy asked.  "I mean, the two we captured?"

Thokmay nodded.  "Kulbinder told them.  That's why they made a break
for it.  I should have gone with them."

"No," the tiger said without opening his eyes.  "Using them as a
distraction was our best chance of---"

"I'm tired of using people," Thokmay snapped.  "I'm tired of people
getting hurt because I'm royal and they're not."

The tiger's tail twitched.  "Those almost sound like rebel words, most
respected."

Thokmay clambered to his feet.  "I'll take first watch," he told Noxy,
striding to the door and banging it shut behind him.

Noxy sat in silence for a moment, not knowing what to say.  She could
smell the tiger's damp fur, she realized, and for some reason that
stirred her into action.  She took a blue jug from the shelf beside
the cot and shook it.  Water gurgled inside.  "Here," she told
Kulbinder, settling beside him.  "Let me give that a wash."

As she peeled back the makeshift bandage, the tiger said, "You've been
here before."

Noxy nodded.  "Not for a while, though.  Sorry!"  She winced as the
bandage pulled a few hairs away from the tiger's side.

"And the man who lives here?" the tiger asked.

Noxy paused.  "How do you know---oh.  You can smell him?"  The tiger
grunted.  Noxy carefully poured a few more drops of water onto the
bandage to loosen it.  "He's a magician.  He used to live in Stale
when I was little, but then a bunch of people got sick with the
scribbles, and he had to do a spell to save them, and now he can't
sleep in a house that's close to anyone else, so he lives here."  She
shrugged as if it didn't matter.  "Or in a cave down by Duck
Droppings, or sometimes in another hut that's further up the pass.  He
still does magic sometimes for us and the other villages, but my
*amma* says he's getting absent-minded.  Sorry."

The tiger made a sound deep in his throat as the bandage tugged at
some more hairs, but didn't move a muscle.  "Don't be.  You humans are
sorry for too many things, too often."  He yawned.  "Please don't let
the prince stay out there too long."  And then the only sound in the
the hut was his snoring, and the crackling of the fire, and the
whistle of the wind through chinks in the walls.

Noxy must have dozed, because she woke with a start when the door
banged open.  "Trolls," Thokmay said curtly.  "A dozen of them, and
those are just the ones I can see."

Kulbinder struggled to his feet.  "What are they doing?"

"Just watching, but every time I turn around, they've come a little
closer."  The prince knelt in front of the fire and chafed his hands.
Tiny beads of sweat glistened on his dark skin.  As Kulbinder turned
toward the door, Thokmay put out a hand to stop him.

"I need to see for myself, most respected," the tiger rumbled.

"You need to rest," the prince replied firmly.  "Noxious and I will
keep an eye on them."

*Thump!* Something heavy landed on the roof above them.  Thokmay drew
his sword with a quiet curse.

"So much for resting," the tiger said.

"I don't understand," Noxy said helplessly.  "We've had a truce with
the trolls for years."

*THUMP!*  Something much heavier came down on the roof.  A deep voice
grunted something that was clearly a command.

"That was no troll," Kulbinder snarled.  "That was an gorilla, or I'm
a rabbit."

"An ogre," Thokmay said before Noxy could ask.  "But what's an ogre
doing here?"  His eyes went wide.  "Working for the princess," he
breathed, answering his own question.

"We need to be elsewhere, *now*," Kulbinder hissed.

It took only a moment to thrust their meager belongings back into the
pack, and to scoop a few coals out of the fireplace into a pan and
douse the rest with water---even with trolls and ogres outside, Noxy
couldn't bring herself to let it go out completely.

She shouldered the pack and picked up a stick of firewood.  It wasn't
much of a club, but hefting it felt better than being empty-handed.
For a moment she wished Grappa Gas and his slingshot were there, or
that she was somewhere else.  Then she looked at the prince and the
tiger and nodded.  "Ready."

*One.*  She yanked open the door.  Thokmay heaved the bundle of blankets
through it.

*Two.*  The ogre dropped onto the blankets with a roar.

*Three.*  With a roar of his own, Kulbinder threw himself onto the
ogre's back and dragged his claws through its thick fur.

*Four.*  As the ogre bellowed and reached back to grab the tiger,
Thokmay and Noxy ran for the dropoff.

*Five.*  A shingle torn from the roof exploded against a rock an arm's
length from Noxy.  "Go!" Kulbinder roared behind them.

*Six.* A troll burst into view from behind a rock ahead of them, its
teeth bared.  "Gandan!" Thokmay shouted, swinging his sword.  The
troll dodged back and went down in a tangle with a second troll.

*Seven.* Noxy threw herself onto Big Blue.  Thokmay landed beside her,
stumbling and falling.  "Hurry!" Noxy shouted to Kulbinder, and,
*Wait!* she mind-shouted at Big Blue, who was already pulling away in
panic.

"Wait!  What are you doing!?" Thokmay demanded.

"I can't stop him!" Noxy shouted.  *Please, wait!* she begged, but the
big cloud ignored her.  She stared helplessly as Kulbinder skidded to
a halt at the edge of the dropoff.

"There!" she shouted, pointing down the narrow canyon toward the pass
to a spur of rock.  "Quickly!"

The tiger didn't need to be told twice.  He turned and ran with an
awkward three-legged gait.  Beyond him, the wounded ogre picked up a
rock and flung it with all its might.  *Crack!*  The rock shattered
against a boulder, flinging dagger-edged shards in all directions.

"Faster faster faster," the prince begged, his sword forgotten in his
hands.  The trolls were scrambling across the loose scree toward the
rock spur, clumsy on the ground compared to their grace in the trees
but still fast, so fast.

*He's not going to make it,* Noxy realized, her heart sinking.  She
dropped to one knee and put her hand on Big Blue's back.  *Go closer!*
she ordered.

The cloud sped up.  Noxy clenched her jaw.  *I said **closer**!*  The
whole cloud jerked to one side like a goof stung by a bee, toppling
Thokmay off his feet.

"Now!" Noxy screamed. "Jump now!"  And as another rock flew through
the air, Kulbinder skidded on the rocks, rolled over, sprinted toward
the cliff's edge, and threw himself into the air.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 13: Found

"No!"  Thokmay dove forward and grabbed the tiger's paws as Kulbinder
scrabbled to hold on, his hindquarters slipping slowly but surely off
the cloud's flank.  Noxy grabbed Thokmay's collar and belt and held on
with all her might.  *Bunch up!* she commanded the cloud, but Big Blue
was too frightened to pay attention.  Heaving and yelling incoherent
instructions at each other, she and Thokmay finally managed to get
Kulbinder up, on, and safe.

The trolls reached the edge of the canyon, hooting and snarling their
frustration as they flung rocks toward the fleeing trio, then toward
each other as badly-aimed shots turned the pack into a brawl.  The
ogre roared and smacked them, sending them tumbling, but instead of
restoring order that just sent the trolls for the forest.  The last
Noxy saw of them as Big Blue rounded the corner was the ogre perched
on top of a boulder, scratching its armpit in frustration.

She turned back to Thokmay and Kulbinder, who had moved to the center
of the cloud.  As Thokmay dabbed at the fresh blood soaking into the
bandage on Kulbinder's side, the tiger said, "Well done, both of
you."

"Thanks," Noxy said, sitting down beside them.  Before she could add,
"You too," or ask, "But why did they attack us?" she felt a twinge in
the back of her head.  She scrambled to her feet and shaded her eyes.

"What is it this time?" Thokmay asked despairingly.

Noxy waited a heartbeat to answer.  "There," she said, pointing.

Thokmay looked at the sky, then back at her.  "I don't see anything."

"That cloud," Noxy said, feeling her heart sink.  "It's the one
Tasteless was riding.  He's come after us."

*And he's been clever about it,* she added to herself.  She didn't
know his cloud's name, but Tasteless had kept her up high, hidden
against the magnificent cirrus that floated above the mountains this
time of year, far beyond the reach of the cloudherds.  She was easy
enough to see once Noxy felt her, but without that twinge, she
wouldn't have known the cloud was there.

"Have they seen us?" Kulbinder asked, struggling to sit up.

"How would I know?" Noxy snapped.

"He was just asking," Thokmay snapped back.

Noxy spread her hands.  "I... don't... know..." she said, enunciating
every word clearly and coldly.  "But if they haven't, they will soon.
We have to get moving."

It took her several minutes to calm Big Blue enough to get him to
descend into the canyon and turn north.  It wasn't much cover---in
fact, if Tasteless and whoever else was riding with him knew where to
look, it wouldn't be any cover at all---but it was all she could think
of.

Flying lower meant flying in shadow.  Noxy started shivering as soon
as they were out of the sun.  "Come here," Kulbinder finally told her.
She was too cold to protest.  With her on one side and Thokmay on the
other, the tiger looked like a lonely black and orange book between
two strangely-carved bookends.

Three Springs Canyon rejoined the pass a few minutes later.  It was as
if the mountains all stepped back together to let the sun in.  The
sudden brightness stung Noxy's eyes.  She blinked and rubbed them with
the heels of her hands, wondering what was happening back in Stale and
wishing she was there.

"They've seen us," Thokmay said flatly, nodding skyward.  Noxy looked
up.  Sure enough, the big cow was descending toward them.  Even as she
watched, her dive steepened and she picked up speed.

"All right," she said through clenched teeth, "Let's see what you've
got."  She closed her eyes.  *Bunch up,* she mind-spoke to Big Blue.
*It's a race.*

*Don't like,* the cloud grumbled in exactly the same tone Little Gas
used when someone put cauliflower in front of him.

*Please?* Noxy coaxed.

The cloud grumbled again wordlessly, but gathered itself into a dense
pillow and sped up.

It wasn't enough.  Noxy coaxed and prodded, but no matter how fast Big
Blue went, the other cloud kept gaining.  She was younger and stronger
than the old bull, and Tasteless was driving her hard.

"They have archers," Thokmay announced after a few hundred heartbeats.

"Of course they do," Noxy snapped.  "Any other good news?"

Thokmay studied the approaching cloud for a moment.  "Not really.
They're Shudarga's own troops, not Canaries, so they won't hesitate to
fire."

Suddenly Noxy had had enough.  "All right.  If they want a race, let's
give them a race" She closed her eyes to concentrate.  *Turn around.*

*???*

*Turn around,* she repeated firmly.  *Still a race, but other way.*

If Big Blue had been a child, his reply would have earned him a day of
chores from Granna Fee, but he slowed, banked, and turned.

"What's going on?" Kulbinder demanded.

Noxy grinned without a shred of humor.  "We're going to make it
*interesting.*"

She didn't bother to coax any more.  As Tasteless and the archers drew
closer, she pummelled Big Blue with the same command over and over
again: *Faster!* The cloud caught the urgency in her voice, or maybe
he just remembered what it was to be young.  As the mountains slipped
by, he drew himself in and pushed himself harder and harder.

"I hope you know what you're doing," Thokmay muttered.

"Nope!" Noxy said, still grinning mercilessly.  "But I'm pretty sure
they don't either."

She glanced back just as their pursuers loosed the first arrow.  The
other cloud was only a hundred strides behind them, and perhaps twenty
above.  The arrow seemed to float for a moment before dropping in
their wake.  "Ranging shot," Thokmay said grimly.  "They're not sure
of the height yet."

And then they rounded a bend in the canyon and Noxy surged to her
feet.  "There!  There they are!"

The herd of clouds that had stormed past them that morning crowded the
peaks on either side of the canyon.  Hungry and tired after their
panicky charge, the cows and calves grazed on leftover crusts of
winter snow.  The bulls jostled half-heartedly for position in the
canyon's center.  As Big Blue began to slow, Noxy dug her hands into
him and mind-shouted, *Faster!  Faster!*

The big old bull surged ahead.  Noxy heard him mind-roar a challenge
to the other bulls.  "Hang on!" she shouted needlessly to the prince
and the tiger.

Big Blue plowed into the herd at top speed, knocking other clouds
aside.  A young bull flung a flurry of snow at him, but missed and
spattered another confused member of his own herd.  Within moments
rain and snow were flying in all directions.

Noxy glanced back over her shoulder and whooped.  Tasteless and the
soldiers were right in the middle of the cloud brawl, just as she had
hoped.  Even as she watched, one of the bulls slammed into the cow
they were riding, tossing the archers into the air.

*Down!* Noxy ordered.  *Down down down!*

Big Blue dropped like a fluffy gray stone.  Kulbinder yowled and dug
in his claws to avoid being left hanging in mid-air.  Thokmay clung to
him, shouting something that Noxy couldn't hear above her own yell.

They levelled off just a few strides above the ground.  "Are you
mad!?" Thokmay demanded.

"Could be!" Noxy said cheerfully as Big Blue banked and turned to head
back the way they had come.

Her smile faded as they sped north.  She had bought them some time,
but that was all.  Whatever else Tasteless was, he wasn't stupid---he
would figure out pretty quickly which way they had gone.

"We need to find somewhere to hide," she told Thokmay, who was huddled
next to Kulbinder in cold misery.

"What we *need* is to turn around and head for Gandan," Thokmay
replied.

"I told you, we're going to find the grownups," Noxy replied wearily.

"And what if we can't?" Thokmay asked.  "Or what if we don't all make
it?"  He nodded at the tiger, whose flank was rising and falling in
quick, shallow gasps.

"We'll make it," Noxy said, trying to sound as certain as she didn't
feel.

Then she looked back and her heart sank.  "Here they come again."

She had no idea how Tasteless had managed to get his cloud back under
control so quickly, but he had.  He was driving her hard, forcing her
to stay bunched up against the headwind that was wearing Big Blue
down.  At the pace they were going, he and the soldiers would catch
them in minutes, and she was fresh out of tricks.

But Thokmay wasn't.  "Take us back to the hut."

Noxy stared at him.  "Are you crazy?"

Thokmay shrugged.  "Could be."  He scratched Kulbinder's ears gently,
getting a small tail twitch but nothing more in response.  "But if the
trolls are still there, maybe they won't be able to tell us apart.  Or
maybe they'll just pelt us both."

"But---"

"*Im awa pfa ta.*" It took Noxy a moment to realize the voice was
Kulbinder's.  He opened one eye and looked at her.  "An old Bantangui
saying.  It means, oh no, not this again."  His lips curled back to
reveal the whites of his teeth.  "Do it."

The soldiers were almost within bowshot again when Noxy steered Big
Blue hard to the left into Three Springs Canyon.  There were fewer of
them---at least two fewer than there had been.  In her mind's eye,
Noxy imagined them tumbling off Tasteless's cloud as he barged into
the herd.  She pushed her shakes away and focused on keeping Big Blue
moving despite his exhaustion.  Clouds were made for long journeys,
not for sprints and charges, and Big Blue's best days for either were
long behind him.

She loved the old cloud, she suddenly realized.  For all that she
complained about how slow and sedate he was, he had been part of her
life since she could walk---or even before, judging from Grappa Gas's
occasional digs at her mother and the withering looks they earned him
from Granna Fee.

The now-familiar spur of rock loomed ahead.  Noxy closed her eyes and
pictured Stale's walls rising straight and strong around her.  *Like
that,* she mind-spoke.  With a weary, wordless acknowledgment, Big
Blue began re-shaping himself.

"What's happening?" Thokmay asked as ridges of cloud bunched up around
them.

"I'm giving us some cover," Noxy said.  "It won't stop any rocks or
arrows, but at least they'll have to shoot blind."

"But then we'll be blind too!"

Noxy stroked Big Blue gently.  "Not me."  She closed her eyes and let
the cloud's sight fill her eyes.

*Sssst!*  The first arrow hissed overhead.  Thokmay twitched at the
sound, but didn't say anything.

*Deepen!* Noxy begged Big Blue.  The cloud beneath them immediately
began to sag.

"What?" Thokmay protested, a note of panic in his voice.

"It's all right," Noxy told him without opening her eyes.  "They'll
think we're at the same level as the rest of the cloud."  Then she
remembered his fall and belatedly added, "Sorry, I should have warned
you."

*Sssst!*  The second arrow punched through the cloud wall a stride
above their heads.  "That would have been nice," he said testily.

The pursuing cloud drew closer.  She could see Tasteless now, standing
near the front of the cloud, wide-legged and grinning.  He was
enjoying this, she realized angrily.  The four archers in front of him
were each down on one knee to steady themselves, drawing and aiming
carefully as another soldier said, "Steady... Steady... Number three!"
She flinched at the flat *whack!* of the bowstring.  The arrow flew
too fast for the cloud's sight to follow, but she heard its hiss above
them.

"Rot it, where are the trolls?" she ground out through clenched
teeth.  Then she took a deep breath.  *Up!* she mind-spoke.

*Tired...* Big Blue replied muzzily.

*I know, I know,* Noxy said.  The big cloud felt like he was going to
fall apart below them.  She knew that couldn't actually happen, not
while he was still alive, but she wished she could lend him her own
strength.  If she could just---

"Wait."  She didn't realize she said it aloud.  "Wait.  Maybe..."

She closed her eyes and *reached* with her mind.  Except it wasn't
like reaching with her hand, it was more like taking all of her own
thoughts and putting them in a box so that there was space for other
thoughts, quiet ones, so faint with distance and strangeness that she
couldn't normally mind-hear them any more than she could hear ants
walking along a windowsill or pine needles falling in the distance,
except that wasn't right either.  She wasn't listening, she was, she
was *sharing*, she was shaping herself to the other thoughts the way
the clay had shaped itself to her hand when she was a little girl and
a travelling Hett potter had spent a week in Stale and had made little
squares just the right size for children's handprints and her mother
had paid half a cowrie for two of them and the clay had been soft and
grainy when she pushed her pudgy little hand into it, squishing up
between her fingers until---

*Down.*  She mind-spoke the command to the cloud Tasteless was riding
as if she was telling her toes to wiggle or her fist to clench, and
the cloud obeyed.  Moments later she heard shouts of surprise as the
cloud dropped beneath Tasteless and the soldiers.

She opened her eyes, and the connection was gone.  She swayed,
suddenly dizzy, and would have fallen if Thokmay hadn't caught her
arm.  "What just happened?" he demanded.

"I... I... Her name is Little Beads," she replied, dazed.  "Because
she likes making hail."  And then the world swam around her and she
collapsed.

"Noxy!  Noxy!"  Someone was shaking her.  Why were they doing that?
Was it time for breakfast?  Why couldn't she just keep sleeping?

Her thoughts unswirled back into focus.  She sat up, pushing his hand
away weakly.  "I'm all right," she lied.  "How long was I...?"

"Just a couple of heartbeats," he said.  "But I think the trolls---"

A rock whistled over his head. "---are back," he finished.

Someone shouted in the distance.  A troll hooted in response, then
another, and then there was a scream, human or troll, she couldn't
tell, as a rock or an arrow found its mark.  "Sounds like it your plan
worked," Noxy said weakly.

"Never mind that.  We've stopped moving.  And Kulbinder won't wake
up.  He's bleeding again, and I can't make it stop.  What are we going
to do?"

"I don't know."  Noxy tried getting back on her feet, but it only made
the world start swimming again.  She took a long, slow breath and held
out her hand.  When Thokmay took it, she pulled herself up and put it
on his shoulder to steady herself, just in time to yelp and duck as
another rock flew by.

Big Blue was out.  She could mind-hear that even without trying---he
was so tired he could barely keep himself bunched together enough to
support their weight.  In fact...

"We have to get off," she said urgently.

"What?  But Kulbinder can't---"

"We have to get off *now*!"  Noxy squatted and grabbed the tiger's
forelegs.  "Come on!"

Kulbinder was lighter than he looked, but sagged awkwardly whenever
they tried to pick him up.  Grunting and slipping and barking
instructions at each other, they managed to wrestle him to the edge of
the cloud.  "Hurry... Hurry..." Noxy muttered under her breath.  The
wind had pushed Big Blue up against the steep-sided wall of the
canyon, but she could feel him thinning out beneath them.  The only
good news was that the handful of trolls throwing rocks in their
direction were lousy shots.  She could hear the rest of the troop
harassing the soldiers below, and the *sssst!* and howls of arrows
being fired and finding their marks, but there was nothing she could
do about that now.

"There!" She pointed at a rounded bump of rock no bigger than her
kitchen table.  "Get him onto that!  One... two... three!"

The tiger's body landed on the rock with a thump.  Fresh blood oozing
from the wound on his flank dripped onto the stone.  He stirred, then
fell limp again, not even twitching when a stone bounced off the hard
gray rock he was lying on.

Thokmay scrambled up the slope a few paces and drew his sword.  "Keep
him safe," he ordered, hefting his weapon.

*How?* Noxy wondered, but she leaned over to cover the tiger's head
and shoulders with her arms.  She yelped as a stone struck her arm.

"Leave him alone!" Thokmay shouted furiously.

An answering stone flew through the air and struck Kulbinder's back.
"I said leave... him... *alone!*" the prince roared.  He charged up
the slope, loose stones rolling away beneath his feet.

*Twoo-eee!* Someone whistled two high, clear notes.  *Twoo-eee!*
Noxy's heart almost stopped.  She knew that sound.  She *knew* that
sound!

A small gray bird flew past her head, then another and a third until a
whole flock of mountain irvings were swirling around her.  *Twoo-eee!*
Moving as if they were one creature instead of hundreds, the flock
shot up the mountain, past a startled Thokmay, and dove at the trolls.
Their hoots turned into panicked shrieks as the birds dove at them,
pecking and tearing and flying away before the trolls could swat them.

A boulder uphill shattered with a *crack!* like lightning.  The
trolls' nerve broke.  As they scrambled for the treeline, hooting at
each other in panic, someone shouted below her, "Get us out of here!"
A heartbeat later she saw Tasteless's cloud---Little Beads, she
thought, her names is Little Beads---racing down the canyon toward the
pass, half the flock of irvings still harrying its riders.

With a sound like a sheet being shaken out, the birds above them
wheeled and flew away.  She raised her head.  A familiar figure, as
bald as an egg and smiling like an idiot, was walking toward them from
the direction of the little hut.  As Thokmay slipped and stumbled back
down the slope, she stood up.

The man halted a few strides away.  "Hello, daffodil."

"Hi, *adda*."  She swallowed, her mouth suddenly dry.  "Um, this is
Prince Thokmay of Gandan.  And the tiger is Kulbinder.  He's hurt.
Um, Thokmay?  This is my father, Ulfmaerr.  He's a magician"

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 14: Lost and Found

Ulfmaerr lifted Kulbinder as if the tiger weighed no more than a
child.  He chatted lightly with Thokmay as he led them up the
barely-visible path to his hut.  A prince of Gandan?  He was a long
way from home.  Was Barramarrabee still there?  She was?  Excellent!
She had quite the reputation---the prince must have seen her do
wonders.  The birds?  Oh, that was harly wonderful at all.  "It's
mostly in how you whistle," he explained to Thokmay.  "I'm half
convinced that I wouldn't need a spell at all if I could get the notes
right."

He balanced on one foot for a moment while he pulled the door open
with the other, then ducked his head to enter.  After laying Kulbinder
down in front of the fireplace, his voice turned serious.  "That's
quite a divot you have their, respected tiger," he murmured.  He
placed a hand next to the wound and inhaled slowly.  "But not
infected."  He pointed to the prince without turning his head.  "If
you would, respected, please fetch me the green bottle off that shelf,
the one with the brown stopper."

"Is he going to be all right?" Thokmay asked anxiously, hunkering down
beside his companion as he handed the magician the bottle.

Ulfmaerr waggled his head from side to side in a familiar gesture that
made Noxy's heart ache.  "Possibly.  Probably.  Yes, I think it more
likely than not."  The bottle's glass stopper squeaked as he twisted
it out.

He took a quick swig and wiped his mouth on his sleeve before
replacing the stopper and handing the bottle back to Thokmay.
"Right," he said softly.  "Let's see what we can do here."

Kulbinder's wound didn't knit in front of Noxy's eyes.  The tiger
didn't sparkle, either, and the air wasn't suddenly filled with the
smell of scorched honey.  In fact, none of the things Noxy had read
about in books about heroes and magicians and their adventures
happened.  All that happened was that Kulbinder stirred and made a
low, grumbling sound.

Ulfmaerr relaxed.  "There," he said, sounding pleased.  "That will
stop the bleeding."  He patted the tiger's flank.  "He's still
strong.  I'm sure he'll heal up in no time."

Thokmay folded his hands together in front of his chest and bowed.
"Thank you, respected," he said humbly.

"Oh, you're welcome, I'm sure," Ulfmaerr replied lightly.  "Now, would
you like some tea?  And if you don't mind me asking, do you have any
idea why those trolls were so upset about you being here?  And the men
on the other cloud that came with you---I must say, it was all very
confusing."

Thokmay glanced at Noxy.  When she made no move to speak, he cleared
his throat and said, "Well, respected, that's a bit of a tale."  As
the magician bustled about getting his kettle boiling and searching
for a third mug ("I don't suppose the tiger will want any, do you?
No?  No, I thought not."), the prince gave him an abbreviated version
of the last few days.

"Well, isn't that a thing?" Ulfmaerr said when Thokmay finished.  He
massaged his bald scalp with one hand, frowning.  "And now you're,
what, you're going to find Stale's cloudherds and get their help?  I
suppose that makes sense, but how?  You're not a cloudherd yourself,
are you?"

"No, respected," Thokmay said, "But she is."  He nodded at Noxy.

The magician looked at his daughter blankly, then laughed.  "What?  Oh
no, no, you can't have---I mean, this is going to be quite dangerous.
Already has been, from what you say.  You can't expect a child
to---no, no, that's quite out of the question."  He shook his head
vigorously, and then to Noxy's cringing embarrassment, leaned over and
tousled her hair.

As Ulfmaerr turned back to Kulbinder, Thokmay shot Noxy a questioning
look.  "Later," she mouthed silently, patting the air with one hand.
He nodded, then smiled insincerely when Ulfmaerr said, "Right, now who
wants some dinner?"

For all his magic, Noxy's father had never learned to do anything more
complicated with food than boil it or fry it.  After watching him for
a few minutes with ever-increasing frustration and dismay, Thokmay
volunteered to make the meal, then insisted.  "To thank you for your
hospitality, respected," he said.  "It's a lowland custom, you see---I
would feel I was being rude if I did not."

Noxy and Ulfmaerr sat in silence while the prince peeled, chopped,
seasoned, and muttered.  "So," the magician finally said.  "Would you
like me to tell you a story?  I swear it's mostly true."

"Sure," Noxy said.  She leaned back against the wall and closed her
eyes as her father began one of the Ruudian children's tales she had
loved so much when she was little.  Once upon a time, the Prince of
Cats decided to go and see the dragon...  She smiled at the funny
parts, and was careful not to wipe the tears from her eyes when he was
looking at her.

Dinner was potatoes, two kinds of onions, and carrot shavings, all
simmered together with a bit of salt and a precious little knob of
ginger.  Ulfmaerr praised it lavishly, humming a little as he
wolfed it down.  Noxy ate a full plate, but waved away Thokmay's offer
of a second.

"Well then," the magician said to Thokmay when they were finished.  "I
should probably go and see if any of our trollish friends are still
about."

"Please, respected, I can do that," the prince said, rising.

"No no no."  Ulfmaerr waved him down, standing as well.  "You should
get some rest.  And besides, if they *are* still here, that sword of
yours won't be nearly as much use as, well, you know."  He cracked a
knuckle and grinned.

"Yes, respected," Thokmay acquiesced, sitting back down beside
Kulbinder.  The tiger stirred but didn't wake.

A cold gust of wind swirled into the hut when Ulfmaerr opened the
door.  The flames in the fireplace crackled as they danced to one side
for a heartbeat, then straightened and went back to their quiet
conversation.  Thokmay set the pot of stew aside, scratched
Kulbinder's ears for a moment, and said, "Spell price?"

Noxy nodded, not trusting herself to speak for a moment.  "It was the
scribbles," she said.  The plague had swept through the mountains when
Noxy was six, carried by clockwise gulls blown off course by a storm
or by wandering Hett smiths or maybe just the turn of the season.  At
first it was just an itch that slowly worsened.  Then dark marks
appeared on people's skin.  Over the course of a week, they condensed
to form words written in an alphabet that no one recognized.  By this
point the sufferer was feverish and unable to sleep.  Soon after, they
were raving in some unknown tongue.

"And then my father showed up and cured us," Noxy finished.  "A couple
of people died in Duck Droppings before he could get there, and a
handful more further up the pass, but he came to Stale first because
that's where *amma* and I were.  At least, that's what everybody said
afterward.  He wanted to save us, but now..."  She wiped her eyes with
the back of her sleeve, not caring any more that the prince was
watching.  "As far as he's concerned, I'll always be that six year old
girl.  He can't see that I'm growing up, or that *amma* is going gray.
He's just... stuck."

"I'm sorry," Thokmay said quietly.

Noxy forced a shaky laugh.  "You know the worst thing?"  She pulled up
her sleeve to show the spiral of text running around her forearm.  "We
still don't even know what it means."

They sat in silence for a minute and listened to Kulbinder breath.
"He gave me these," the prince said, touching the four parallel scars
on his face with one finger.  "About a month after the princess raised
her flag.  He told me not to try to escape until my father's army was
close, but I was too scared to listen."

"He---he did that because you didn't listen?"  Noxy gasped.

Thokmay shook his head.  "I got caught.  The colonel---the one who was
commanding the Canaries back then---he wanted to make an example out
of me.  Kulbinder said I was his boy, and he'd take care of it, and
then..."  Thokmay paused.  "He was so fast.  By the time I flinched,
it was already over.  He asked the colonel if that was good enough,
and the colonel said yes, and that was the end of it."

"That must have been horrible."

Thokmay shook his head again.  "Whatever the colonel had in mind would
have been a lot worse.  A lot of soldiers were having second thoughts,
and..."  He shrugged.  "He liked making examples out of people."

He stared into the fire.  The flames made his eyes dance against his
dark skin.  "The worst part of it was Sergeant Dorbu thinking I was a
coward.  And now he probably thinks I'm a spy, too."

The little room was quiet again after that until Noxy yawned and
stretched.  "Do you want the bed?"

Thokmay glanced at the narrow cot.  "Isn't your father coming back?"

"I don't think so.  He can't sleep when other people are around.
Don't worry," she added wearily as Thokmay opened his mouth to object,
"He'll have somewhere else nearby.  He's had a lot of practice at that
sort of thing."

In the end, Noxy wound up on the cot while Thokmay curled up on a
couple of blankets next to Kulbinder.  As fatigue pulled her down into
sleep, Noxy reached out with her mind for Big Blue.  *Mmm?* the cloud
mind-mumbled, barely awake himself.

*You were good today,* she mind-spoke.  *Really good.*

*Mmm.*  The cloud sounded like he was already asleep again.  Within
moments, Noxy was too.

She woke in darkness.  The fire had gone out---a few stubborn coals
still glowed dull red, but only when she didn't look straight at them.
Kulbinder was snoring, and the wind whistled a soft, irregular tune
through chinks in the hut's stone walls as it changed direction, then
changed back.

She lay still, hoping sleep would take her again, but the mug of tea
she had drunk with dinner had other plans.  Sighing, she swung her
legs over the side of the of the cot into her boots and laced them
up.  Neither the prince nor the tiger stirred when she unlatched the
door and slipped out into the night.

Ulfmaerr was sitting on a stone a few paces away.  "Hello, daffodil,"
he said absently, his knitting needles clicking busily in his hands.

"Hi, *adda*," she yawned.  "What are you making?"

He held up a strip of knitting the length and width of his forearm.
"A scarf.  Winter will be here soon, you know."

"Mm hm."  She yawned again.  "Who's it for?"

The magician hesitated, a confused expression on his face.  "I... I
don't know, I suppose it could be for anyone, really."  He stared at
it.  "Someone who likes white and blue."

*Amma's favorite colors,* Noxy thought.  What she said was, "That's
nice.  I need to pee.  I'll be right back."

He was still there when she returned a few minutes later, but had
stood up to give his seat to a large tufted owl.  She stopped, not
knowing if she should approach or leave them in peace.  Ulfmaerr
beckoned her forward.

"Here she is," he said to the bird.  "Um..."

"Noxy," she supplied.

"Exactly.  I'd like to introduce you to Redclaw.  We've been friends
for years.  Gifted, this is... um... the one I was telling you about,
the cloudherd."

"Respected," the owl said, bobbing her head.  Noxy bowed her own in
return.

"Redclaw was just telling me about a conversation he overheard,"
Ulfmaerr said.  "Gifted, if you please?"

"Of course."  The owl shuffled forward a couple of hopping steps and
looked around as if to make sure no one was eavesdropping.  "I was
just waking up, not looking to put my beak in anyone else's affairs,
when who should I hear below me but Dragger.  Drags Down Trees With
One Hand, I mean, the ogre, though why they call him that I certainly
don't know, I don't think he could drag down much more than a sapling,
and that with both hands."  She sniffed disapprovingly.  "Comes from
spending all his time with trolls, if you ask me.  Like with like, I
always say, like with like, isn't that right, Ulfamerr?"

"Absolutely," the magician said, raising his finger to his lips before
Noxy could point out that the owl was talking to a couple of humans.

"Absolutely," the owl agreed.  "Anyhoot, he was *quite* unhappy about
his encounter with some great cat or other, and about being pecked to
pieces by a flock of irvings---those were his exact words, pecked to
pieces.  I can only *imagine* what he would have said if it had been a
flock of owls," she snickered.

"I expect he wouldn't have been able to say anything except 'ow!,"
Ulfmaerr observed with a wink.

The owl blinked.  "What do you mean?"

"If he'd been pecked by owls," Ulfmaerr explained good-naturedly.
"All he would be able to say would be 'ow'."

The owl reared back.  "Are you suggesting we would have taken his
*tongue*?" she demanded icily.  "Respected, that's disgusting---truly,
disgusting."

"No no no," Ulfmaerr said hastily, patting the air with his hands.  "I
just meant that a flock of owls would have given him a much more
thorough pecking."

"Hm."  The owl studied him skeptically for a moment, then ruffled her
wings as if shrugging. "If you say so.  Anyhoot, there he was,
grumbling and whining, when who do you suppose came swinging through
the trees?"

"Who?" Ulfmaerr asked.

"Linger," the owl whispered loudly.

"No!" Ulfmaerr said, doing his best to sound shocked.

"Yes!" the owl hissed.  "It was Linger himself.  I've never heard of
him coming anywhere *nearly* this shallow before, not in all my years,
but there he was."

"Wait, who's Linger?" Noxy asked, confused.  "And what do you mean,
shallow?"

The owl ruffled her feathers again.  "Shallow as in not deep," she
said with the same impatient tone in her voice that Noxy had often
used when explaining something obvious to Little Gas.  "Linger keeps
to the deep forest---the deep, *deep* forest, places where men and
metal have never gone.  Coming out here, where the trees can barely
hear each other, well, if I hadn't seen it myself, I wouldn't have
believed it."  She shook her head.  "Wouldn't have believed it at all,
and I'll believe almost anything."

"But who *is* he?" Noxy asked again.

"He's the voice of the forest," Ulfmaerr replied, suddenly serious.
"He's the one the Gifted turn to when they need to make a decision.
And if he sent Dragger here, you're in a lot more trouble than I
realized."

"Well, well, circle around a bit there, I didn't say he sent Dragger,
I just said I saw them talking."  She shifted her weight back and
forth nervously.  "Truth be, I didn't perch around to listen to what
they had to say.  Wherever Linger is, other trolls aren't far behind,
and, well..."  She twisted her head to look behind her, then leaned
forward and whispered, "They'll eat *anything*."

"You poor thing," Ulfmaerr said sympathetically.  "That must have been
quite frightening."

The owl preened her chest with her beak in a quick gesture that in a
human being might have been a shrug.  "Yes, well, no harm done, no
harm done.  Was that everything you needed?"

"Everything and more."  He fished in his satchel for a piece of dried
pear and set it down on the stone beside her.  "And here's a little
something for the road."

The owl looked up at him skeptically again.  "I'm not going to use the
road.  I'm going to fly."

"Well then, something for the flight," Ulfmaerr replied, his smile
stuck in place.

"Hm."  The owl picked up the pear with one claw and winged away into
the night as silently as a cloud.

"She is quite the character," Ulfmaerr chuckled as he re-seated
himself.  "Although that's worrying news.  Dragger is quite the
bruiser---he's been tossed out of more than one troop for picking
fights, and the trolls who hang around him aren't exactly the pick fo
the litter, if you know what I mean."  He paused a moment to pull his
knitting out of his satchel.  "Why would Linger have anything to do
with him?"

Noxy shivered.  The night air was cold enough to turn her breath to
steam.  Even her coat couldn't keep the chill out.  "I'm going to go
back in."

"What?  Oh, of course."  Ulfmaerr nodded toward the hut.  "Sleep
well."

"You too," she replied.

Just as she turned to leave, something whooshed over her head.
"Humans!" a now-familiar voice screeched.  "Respected, there are
humans in the canyon!"

Ulfmaerr stood up hurriedly, his needles and yarn still in his hands.
"Are you sure?"

Redclaw circled steeply and landed back on the stone she had vacated
just moments before.  "Of course I'm sure," she said crossly.  "They
were on a couple of clouds.  Some of them were getting off.  They had
bows."  She gasped.  "Why, I just realized---they had *bows*!  What if
they had seen me?  I could have been killed!  Humans don't always ask
questions first, you know," she added darkly, casting a sidelong
glance at Noxy.

Noxy ignored the look.  "You said a couple of clouds?  Like, two?"

"Yes, that's normally what a couple means," the owl replied testily.
She rustled hear feathers.  "First Dragger, then Linger, now this.
Honestly, respected, the company you keep."

She was gone again before the magician could reply.

"Get the others up and ready to move," Ulfmaerr ordered Noxy.  "If the
tiger's well enough to walk, we might be able to lose them in the
forest."

"And if he's not?" Noxy asked, scrambling to keep up with him as he
hurried back toward the hut.  He didn't answer.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 15: Ambushed

"He *can't*!" Noxy snapped a few minutes later.  "He just can't, all
right?  I pushed him too hard yesterday.  If we try to ride him now,
we won't get a hundred strides before he thins out and drops us all."

She was almost in tears.  The sun was just starting to paint a sharp
outline around the peaks of the mountains to the east.  The soldiers
that were hunting them would be moving soon.  She knew they should be
on Big Blue and away, but the instant she laid her hand on him, she
knew that wasn't going to happen.  The big old cloud was so tired that
he could barely mind-speak a fuzzy, "Mm?"  His flanks were so foggy
that every gust of wind blew tufts of him away.  If Grappa Gas or
Granna Fee or, rot and ruin, if her *mother* saw the shape he was in,
she'd be dredging privies for a year, and lucky to ever be allowed on
cloudback again.

Kulbinder growled.  Ulfmaerr's magic had closed and scarred his wound
while he slept, but he still favored his left hindleg when he walked.
"Well, we can't stay here.  Most respected?"

Thokmay looked bleakly at the cloud.  "If Noxy says we can't fly, then
we walk."

Kulbinder's upper lip twitched back to reveal sharp teeth.  "We can't
outrun them."

"We won't have to," Ulfmaerr said, coming up behind them.  He had
traded his satchel for a sturdy traveller's pack and a bamboo staff
capped with steel at both ends.  "If we hike up there," he pointed,
"We can be in the deep forest in an hour.  The trees will hide us from
any eyes they have in the air, and they won't be able to move any
faster through the trees than we can."

"Maybe not faster than you," the tiger rumbled.  "But the children
won't be able to---"

"Forgive me, respected," Thokmay interrupted, "But we're not
children.  And we can keep up if you can."

He and the tiger locked eyes.  The tiger looked away first.  "As you
say, most respected."  He stretched and padded away, still favoring
his leg.

"Huh," Thokmay said, suddenly grinning.  "That's the first time I've
ever beaten him at one of those."

They walked single file along the path that led upward from Ulfmaerr's
hut.  It disappeared sometimes beneath loose scree that had slid down
the mountainside during the winter.  A tiny stream, fast and clear and
bitterly cold, cut across it several times, disdainful of the path's
slow switchbacks in its hurry to reach the canyon.

Noxy's breath fogged with every step.  When she glanced back, she saw
speckles of ice on the stubble on Thokmay's chin and upper lip.  He
smiled at her, teeth white against his dark skin.  She forced herself
to smile back, still worrying about Big Blue.  She had told the cloud
to go home, but he had just mind-mumbled dozily again.  *There's
nothing else you can do,* she told herself, but it sounded all too
much like she was rehearsing excuses.

The next time she glanced back, she saw sunlight twinkle on metal.
"There they are," she puffed, dropping to the ground cross-legged to
catch her breath.  Kulbinder stretched out beside her with Thokmay on
his other side.  Ulfmaerr leaned on his staff, but showed no other
sign of fatigue.

Thokmay shaded his eyes with his hand and counted by twos under his
breath.  "Sixteen," he reported.  "But I can't see who's who from this
far away."  He struggled to his feet.  "And I think they just spotted
us."

Sure enough, one of the tiny figures below them was pointing up the
mountain in their direction.  Noxy stood, her legs protesting.
Without a word, the foursome resumed their climb.

Noxy began counting her strides.  Ten got her from this rock to that
one, so *that* rock would be... a hundred?  Left, right, left,
right... A hundred and eight, unless she had counted the nineties
twice.  That patch of ice looked to be about the same distance, so---

*Keee!*  She shrieked and ducked as something swift and dark screeched
and swooped over her head.  Thokmay drew his sword with a curse, but
the hawk was already far out of reach.  It circled above them.

"Magician!  Can you bring it down?" Kulbinder demanded, gathering
himself as if to pounce.

Ulfmaerr shook his head, hefting his staff.  "No more than you,
respected," he said.  "Is it Gifted?"

"How would I know?" the tiger growled.  "There are rather a lot of us,
you know."

The hawk screeched again.  "It's a spotter," Thokmay said, sheathing
his sword.  "My father uses them to track prey when he's hunting.
We'll have to try to lose it once we reach the forest.  Come on."  He
turned to set off once again.

"Wait!"  Noxy grabbed his arm, kicking herself mentally for not asking
the obvious when they first set out.  "The owl said they came in on
two clouds.  Where are they?"

Then she answered her own question in time with Thokmay.  "Up ahead."

The prince looked up at the hawk again with something like hatred in
his eyes.  "It's not a spotter.  They're driving us."  He frowned.
"But why not just put soldiers down right above the hut?"

*Because Tasteless lost control of his cloud yesterday,* Noxy
realized, but she couldn't say that without explaining how she knew.
And if she explained that, she'd have to tell them that she could
mind-speak to clouds from a distance, and she wasn't ready to do that.
"Maybe they're scared of my *adda*," she ventured.  "I mean, after the
flock of irvings yesterday..."

Thokmay glanced at Ulfmaerr, then at Kulbinder.  The tiger flicked an
ear.  "Maybe," he rumbled.  "But whatever the cause, we must expect an
ambush.  Lead on, most respected."

Noxy didn't bother to count her steps after that.  She kept telling
herself not to look back, or to check if the hawk was still above
them, but she couldn't help herself.  Every time the bird screeched
she jumped a little and looked over her shoulder.  And every time, the
soldiers seemed to be a little closer.

They were struggling up a particularly steep stretch of the path when
Kulbinder slipped.  He scrabbled at the bare stone, his claws unable
to find purchase, before sliding back several strides.  Thokmay
quickly hurried to his side.  "Are you all right?" he asked.

"No, most respected, I am not," the tiger snapped.  "I haven't eaten
since yesterday and my leg feels like something is poking it with a
very sharp stick.  But we must keep moving."

"Wait."  Ulfmaerr crouched down and laid his hand on the tiger's
flank.  Kulbinder flinched but didn't pull away.

"You won't be able to go much further," the magician said.  He looked
back the way they had come, but the soldiers were momentarily hidden
by a turn in the trail.

"Then you must leave me," Kulbinder rumbled.  "All that matters is
getting the most respected to safety."

"No!" Thokmay protested.

"No," Ulfmaerr said at the same moment, raising a hand to forestall
whatever the prince might have said next.  The magician bowed his head
and muttered for a moment, then without warning scooped Kulbinder up
and slung him over his shoulders like a cape.

"Rraawwrr!"  The tiger thrashed and twisted.  "Put me *down!*"

"I think not," Ulfmaerr said.  He fished around inside his mouth for a
moment with his tongue, leaned forward, and spat a tooth onto the
path.  "You two follow me."  With no more ceremony than that, he set
off up the path once again, the furious tiger bouncing on his
shoulders, leaving the price of the spell for strength lying lost
among the rocks and stones on the path.

The sun was a handspan above the peaks behind them when they reached
the top of the ridge.  Noxy had flown over mountains like these many
times, but somehow climbing them made her feel like she was higher
than she had ever been.  Three Springs Canyon stretched left and right
below her, so crisp it might have been a painting.  The rebel soldiers
were in sight again, four bunches of four spaces a few dozen strides
apart, climbing steadily.

Ulfmaerr went on one knee and set Kulbinder down.  The tiger sprinted
a few steps away before sitting on his haunches with his back to the
three humans and starting to clean himself.  "Well, you're welcome,
I'm sure," the magician muttered, taking his staff back from Thokmay.

Noxy closed her eyes.  If the rebels really had put soldiers ahead of
them to lay an ambush, then...  There.  She opened her eyes in shock,
and didn't realized she had gasped until Thokmay said, "Noxy? What's
wrong?  Wait!  Where are you going?"

She ignored him as she raced along the crest of the ridge, fear
squirming in her gut.  She stopped at the edge of the ridge and looked
down into the narrow ravine it overlooked.  Two clouds floated there,
each with a cloudherd and a pair of soldiers sitting on it.  The
larger was Little Beads.  The second was Pillow, Stale's own Pillow.
She'd know the old cow anywhere.  And she'd know its herder too.

"Noxy!"  Thokmay grabbed her arm.  "What are you---oh."  He stared
down at the clouds and their passengers in dismay.

"It's Grappa Gas," Noxy said stupidly.  "What's he doing here?"

Below, Tasteless raised an arm and waved as if they were friends
passing each other on their way to market.  As the soldiers beside the
cloudherd stood, Thokmay raised his own arm in a gesture that was
anything but friendly.

"I'd give the crown for a bow right now," Thokmay muttered.

"Me too," Noxy agreed, oblivious for the moment to the fact that she
didn't actually have a crown and had never fired a bow in her life.
"But what's he *doing* there?  He's on your side!"

"Worry about that later," Thokmay said, tugging her away.  "We have to
keep moving.  And keep our eyes open---they *have* to be setting up an
ambush."

The trail ran half a gallop along the top of the ridge.  Some
stretches were so narrow that they had to go single file with
cliff-steep dropoffs to the left and right.  Kulbinder insisted on
taking the lead on those despite his injury, pacing ahead of them in
case the rebel soldiers had somehow found a way to hide among the few
pebbles that the scouring wind had left behind.  The valleys on either
side were dense and dark with shadowed evergreens, but the only other
living thing at their height was the ever-circling hawk.

Ulfmaerr stopped them when they reached a small marker made of
head-sized stones piled in a loose pyramid.  "Down that way," he
pointed.  The forest beneath them looked no different to Noxy than
anything else they had seen, but her father was already trotting and
skidding down the steep path, dragging his staff behind him like a
ship's rudder to steer.

They were halfway to the forest when four of the boulders next to the
path threw off their gray blankets and stood up to bar the path.  Two
aimed arrows at the four fugitives.  The third hefted a sword, and the
fourth---

"Most respected."  Sergeant Dorbu saluted.

Ulfmaerr oofed as Noxy stumbled into him.  Thokmay skidded to a halt
beside them.  He hesitated a moment, then returned the salute.
"Sergeant.  Uh uh, hold on."  The prince stepped sideways to stand in
front of Kulbinder as the two bowmen turned their arrows on him.

"Hold your shots," Sergeant Dorbu commanded without looking at his
men.  "Most respected, my apologies, but I must insist you come with
us."

"And in the name of my father the king, I order you to let us pass,"
Thokmay replied coldly.

Sergeant Dorbu shook his head.  "I'm sorry," he said, sounding as
though he meant it.  "But I can't do that.  And please don't," he
added to Ulfmaerr as the magician turned the gesture he'd been about
to make into scratching his armpit.  "However quick you might be with
your magic, I'll bet one of my men will be quicker with an arrow."

Loose rock clattered above them.  Noxy shot a look over her shoulder.
Four more soldiers had appeared on the ridge and were making their way
down to join them, swords and bows in their hands.  Her heart sank.
They wouldn't get ten strides if they tried to run.  *At least I'll
get to rest,* she thought despairingly.

That was when the rocks started flying.  The only warning was a single
loud hoot, and then the soldiers were shouting and ducking as trolls
hidden among the rocks ambushed them in turn.  One stone thonked
against Sergeant Dorbu's helmet, making him stagger.  Others knocked
the archers' bows from their hands.

"Make for the trees!"  Ulfmaerr shouted. "Go! Go! Go!"  He charged
downhill, bellowing incoherently and waving his staff.  His companions
slid and skidded down the rocks behind him with, shouting and roaring.
Noxy's shout only grew louder when an arrow loosed by the soldiers
behind them ricocheted off a rock beside her.

A young troll popped up out of nowhere to caper on a rock just an
arm's reach from Noxy.  Baring his teeth, he threw a stone past her
ear to shatter against a boulder next to Sergeant Dorbu.  The sergeant
ducked the sharp-edged fragments without taking his eyes off the
prince.  At just the right moment he flung himself sideways to tackle
the younger man.

But he had forgotten Kulbinder.  As the sergeant leaped, so did the
tiger.  The two collided in mid-air and fell clumsily to the ground.

Thokmay skidded to a halt. "Kulbinder!"

"Run!" the tiger roared, rolling back onto his feet as Sergeant Dorbu
got to his.  "Run, most respected, run!"

Thokmay drew his sword and charged at Sergeant Dorbu instead.  The
sergeant knocked the prince's blade aside with his own and spun back
to fend off the tiger in the same motion.  "Get behind them!" he
shouted to the other soldiers as he ducked another stone.

The tiger feinted toward Sergeant Dorbu, scrambling back with a snarl
when the sergeant cut at him.  "Get to the trees!" he roared at
Thokmay.  "Now!"

It was too late.  One of Sergeant Dorbu's men was still down, knocked
unconscious by a lucky throw, but the archers had drawn their swords
and chased the trolls away long enough to go after Thokmay.  Suddenly
outnumbered, the prince stumbled backward, his sword clanging against
theirs as he desperately fended off their blows.

Noxy watched from the treeline as he gave ground step after step.  The
four soldiers who had been on the ridge would be on him in moments,
and then it would all be over.  "Help him!" she begged her father.

He hefted his staff.  "How?"

She stamped her foot.  "I don't know!  You're the magician!"

"I'm not made of teeth!" he snapped.

At that moment the forest around them seemed to explode.  Dozens of
trolls burst out of the trees and raced uphill, hooting and screaming.
Noxy saw the oncoming soldiers' eyes go wide as a flood of gray fur
swept torward them.

The soldiers facing Thokmay spun around at the sound.  Seizing the
distraction, the prince charged at the nearest, knocking his sword
aside with a wild blow as he ran for the trees.  "Go!" Kulbinder
roared one last time.  He threw himself at Sergeant Dorbu---

---and yowled as his wounded leg buckled beneath him, turning his leap
into a clumsy tumble.  Sergeant Dorbu was on him in a heartbeat.  He
thrust his sword against the tiger's throat.  "Yield!" he demanded.

Ears back, the tiger spat, "No!"

The two glared at each other.  "Damn it, Kulbinder," Sergeant Dorbu
started.  Whatever else he might have said was cut short by a meaty
thump as a rock the size of his head hit him squarely in the chest and
sent him tumbling backward down the mountain.  The tiger struggled to
his feet and half-ran, half-limped to the trees.  The trolls streamed
back into the forest behind him, scrambling over the rocks until they
could clamber up the twisted trunks of the mountain pines.

There was no track or path that Noxy could see, but Ulfmaerr led them
forward without hesitation.  Heavy gray shapes rustled through the
branches above and around them.

"Stop!"  Kulbinder said.  A few strides ahead, sunlight shone through
a gap in the trees where a small stream tumbled down the mountainside.
The tiger crept forward, flowing from shadow to shadow, and studied
the sky.

"Can you see it?" Ulfmaerr asked, sounding as fresh as he had when
they set out that morning.

"No," Kulbinder growled, "But it's up there."  He glared at the stream
as if it were yet another enemy.  "We'll have to chance it."  He
glanced over his shoulder at Thokmay and Noxy.  "In a heartbeat," he
amended.

"Thank you," Thokmay wheezed.  He was leaning against a tree, trying
clumsily to to sheathe his sword as his lungs tried to catch up with
the rest of him.  Noxy had simply slumped to the ground two trees
over.

Thokmay finally managed to slide his sword into his scabbard.  He
wiped his forehead with his sleeve, then looked at Noxy and grinned
weakly.  "Well, that was exciting."

She forced a shaky laugh.  "Just a regular day around here."  She
forced herself to her feet and held out a hand to help him up.  "Come
on."

The foursome waited until Kulbinder growled, "Now," then sprinted
across the narrow treeless gap side by side.  Ulfmaerr took the lead
again once they were back in the trees.  Noxy looked up every once in
a while, but could neither see nor hear any sign of trolls.  *Which
means absolutely nothing,* she reminded herself.  The deep forest was
their home, and they could move silently when they wanted to.

There was no question they were in the deep now.  The trees were no
larger than those around Stale, but strings of greenish-white
ghostbeard moss hung from their branches.  Here and there a fallen
tree lay rotting on the mountainside, or was propped up where it had
been caught by other trees as it fell.  The ground beneath them felt
slightly spongy in places, almost like a cloud.  It wasn't until her
boot sank in up to her ankle that Noxy realized the soil was made
completely of compacted needles and rotting wood that had been pressed
and stirred and pressed again by years of snow and rain.

She had no idea how far they had come or what time it was when
Ulfmaerr called a halt.  They drained his canteen and shared out the
hard cheese and dried apples from his pack.  "So where do we go now?"
Thokmay finally asked.

"Ya depends a thee," a voice answered from the trees.  Branches
rustled as a trio of burly trolls swung down to the ground from the
branches above them.  A fourth troll joined them.  His gray fur was
silvered with age on his head and shoulders.  He smiled at Ulfmaerr,
then turned his gaze on Noxy.  "Ya depends a thee," he repeated.

Noxy's breath caught in her throat.  She recognized the troll---he was
the one she had seen when the soldiers first arrived in Stale.

"Hello, Linger," her father said with a bow.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 16: In Deep

"Hoy an wale met."  The old troll nodded to Ulfmaerr, equal to equal,
without taking his eyes off Noxy.  "Ya've brun a bit strif an wrangles
along ya."

"Sorry about that," the magician said briskly.  "But please, may I
introduce---"

"Ah wit than," the troll interrupted without raising his voice.  He
shifted his gaze to Thokmay.  "Tha've steel a thee."

The prince glanced at Ulfmaerr.  "Your sword," the magician said,
looking meaningfully at the trees around them.  "You're not allowed
iron in the deep.  The forest doesn't like it."

Thokmay reluctantly unbuckled his sword belt and laid it on the
ground.  "An tha cnif an all," the troll said.  A moment later Thokmay
and Noxy's knives both lay on the soft duff.

Satisfied, the troll knuckle-walked over to Kulbinder and held out his
hand, fingers curled in a loose fist.  The tiger sniffed him
delicately, blinked, and yawned to show his teeth.  The troll snorted
in amusement.  "Ay've sich mysel, mat ay've not fra manckle thass at
ma bens."

The tiger looked at Ulfmaerr.  "He said, he has teeth too, but he
wouldn't try to scare his friends with them."

"Are we friends then?" the tiger asked, as casually as he might ask
whether it was going to rain that afternoon.

"Tha ban eask a tha," the troll replied.  He strode over to the
nearest tree and swung himself up.  Branches rustled as some unknown
number of other trolls followed.

"He said that's up to us," Ulfmaerr translated before anyone asked.

One of the three trolls who had come to ground with Linger grunted and
waved toward the trees.  "Well," Ulfmaerr said, "I suppose we should
get moving."  He gestured with his staff at a gap between two twisted
pines.  Single file, the foursome set off.

When she looked over her shoulder to see if Thokmay had heard the
exchange, the three big trolls were no longer following them.  A
rustle overhead told her they were still with them, or that others had
taken their place.  What little light broke through the branches had
the golden tinge of late afternoon.  She suddenly realized that she
was exhausted.  The hike up the mountain, the chase, the fight, and
all of it on top of getting just a few hours sleep...

She stumbled over a root, and would have fallen if she hadn't caught
herself against a tree.  "I need to stop," she said.  Her father
hesitated, then nodded.  He settled himself on the ground with his
back against a tree and took his knitting out of his satchel.  Thokmay
and Kulbinder simply collapsed where they were.

Noxy closed her eyes.  She wondered what her mother was doing right at
that moment.  And Big Blue---how was he?  She hadn't thought about the
old cloud in hours.  Feeling guilty, she reached out with her mind to
see if he was all right.

Something wet rasped across her face.  She batted at it weakly.  Her
mouth tasted like she had been chewing on yarn, and her tongue felt
strangely thick.  She looked at the dappled shadows above her until
they resolved into branches etched against a distant sky.  Why was she
lying down?

She struggled to sit up.  A soft, heavy paw pressed down on her chest
to stop her.  "She's coming around," a deep voice rumbled.

Noxy put a hand on her cheek.  It was damp.  She rubbed it vigorously
with her sleeve.  "Were you just licking me?" she demanded.

Kulbinder sat back on his haunches and blinked.  "Possibly.  How are
you feeling?"

*Like I want to wash my face,* Noxy thought.  "I'm fine.  What
happened?"

"You passed out," Thokmay said from beside her.  "Here."  He held out
a canteen.  "There's a stream up ahead a little ways.  I couldn't boil
it, but I think it's all right."

Noxy took a long swallow of the ice-cold water.  "And what do you
mean, I passed out?"

Thokmay shrugged.  "You said we needed to stop, then you just... fell
over."  He nodded at the canteen in her hand and waited for her to
take another swig.

"Sorry," Noxy said.  She handed the canteen back to him and rubbed her
forehead wearily.  "I'm just really tired."

But that wasn't what had happened.  She had been trying to mind-speak
to Big Blue.  She had opened herself up so that she could mind-hear
him and---

The world swam around her.  She ground the heels of her hands into her
eyes.  "No no no," she whimpered.  It was too much.  She was too small
and it was *forever*.

"Noxy!  Noxy!"  The prince shook her.  "She's sick," he told Kulbinder
urgently.  "Look, she's shaking."

"I'm not sick."  Noxy brush his hand away.  "I just...  Do we have
anything to eat?"  It was the forest, she realized numbly, fear and
wonder stirred together in her chest.  When she had tried to
mind-speak with Big Blue, her thoughts had brushed up against the
forest instead.  It was...  She didn't have words, any more than the
forest itself did.  It was vast and ancient and no more aware of her
than she was of the little black petch bug crawling across her boot,
except that was wrong, the forest *was* aware, it knew everything
inside it because it *was* all of those things put together.  Now that
she knew it was there, she could mind-hear it all around her, even
without trying.  It was like hearing a nearby stream rush by for so
long that you stopped noticing it, or forgetting that you were wearing
boots because you *always* wore boots.  It was right there and if she
relaxed and let herself sink into it she would lose herself in the
depths and never come back to the surface.

"Noxy!"  She snapped back into the present as Thokmay pressed the last
piece of dried apple into her hand.  "Here, eat this."

"Thanks," she mumbled.  She bit off a mouthful and chewed it
mechanically.  Was this how people who could mind-speak to faraway
clouds lost their minds?  Did they literally *lose* them like a coin
dropped in a pond?

Her stomach rumbled. Suddenly ravenous, she swallowed the now-mushy
piece of apple and tore at the rest with her teeth.  "Where's
Ulfmaerr?" she asked as she chewed.

Thokmay shrugged, a worried look on his face.  "He got ahead of us,
and then you fell.  I'm sure he'll be back soon."

"We shouldn't wait."  Kulbinder rose to his feet and nodded toward the
nearest break in the trees.

"Can track him?" Thokmay asked, shouldering his pack.

The tiger snorted.  "It's not as though he bathes every day."

Noxy didn't even look up at the rustling overhead as they started
walking.  The trolls would show themselves when they wanted to.  Until
then, it looked like they were on their own.  She just wished they had
more dried apples.  Or some of her mother's soda bread, heavy and dark
with a rime of salt on the crust and some soft goof's milk cheese
slathered on top.  Her stomach rumbled again.

They found Ulfmaerr perched on a log over a stream a few hundred
strides further down the faint path.  A long string dangled from his
fingers, and three freshly-caught fish lay on a bed of salal leaves
next to him.  Kulbinder made a noise deep in his throat that might
almost have been a meow, and Noxy realized guiltily that he and
Thokmay must be at least as hungry as she was.

"Hello, daffodil," the magician said.  "Hang on just a---hah!"  He
snapped his hand back to yank another yellow-striped perch out of the
stream.  The hapless fish swung back and forth for a moment, its tail
caught in the fishing noose, before Ulfmaerr managed to grab hold of
it and slap its head against the log.

"Dinner?" he asked brightly, scooping up the other fish and holding
them out to his companions.

"Please and thank you," Thokmay said fervently.  "But how are we going
to cook them?  I don't imagine the forest likes fire any more than
iron."

Ulfmaerr looked at him blankly.  "Cook them?"

In the end he let Thokmay skin two of the fish and rub a handful of
salt and chili flakes into them.  Kulbinder gobbled the other two and
then lay down beside the prince, his ears twitching occasionally as
birds called to each other in the forest around them.  Noxy chewed on
the perch's cool, slippery flesh, surprised by how soft it was,
wishing briefly for a toothbrush as her eyelids began to droop.  She
wondered dully for a heartbeat whether she might fall into the forest
again, and then she was asleep.

*The forest knew she was there. But no, that wasn't right.  It didn't
know things, not like people did. It was aware of her, but only
sometimes, just like she was only aware of the little toe on her right
root when she stopped to think about it.*

*It was aware of her now.  It was easier when she was asleep.  Her own
thoughts didn't fight to stay together then.  But what a strange idea
that seemed, 'her own thoughts'.  It was like looking at a school of
fish and seeing only birds, or looking at a million snowflakes dancing
on the wind and not seeing the storm.  It was like saying you could
see the trees, but where was the forest?  Why had she been afraid of
losing herself?  Why had she been afraid?*

A gentle hand shook her awake.  It took her a moment to realize where
she was and who she was, and another moment to realize that the face
in front of her belonged to a troll.

She sat up suddenly.  Thokmay and Kulbinder were fast asleep on the
duff a stride away.  The young prince was on his side, his arm thrown
over the tiger's shoulder as if Kulbinder was a giant stuffed toy.

"Can you understand me?" Noxy asked the troll uncertainly.

She nodded.  "Well enough," she said.  She studied Noxy with curious
brown eyes.  "You were losing yourself again."

Noxy nodded, fear finally rising in her throat.  "I thought I was
dreaming.  But I wasn't, was I?"

The troll shook her head.  "The forest isn't a good place for humans.
But *he* thinks you might be different."  She cocked her head to the
side.  "Are you?"

Noxy didn't have to ask to know that 'he' was Linger.  "I don't know."
She shivered.  "I don't want to be different."

The troll smiled sadly.  "We don't get to decide that.  All we get to
decide is what we do with our differences."

Whatever else she might have said was cut off by something crashing
through the trees nearby.  A chorus of hoots and howls erupted, and
then something screamed.

Noxy scrambled to her feet as a second scream split the air.  The
troll who had been speaking to Noxy lunged forward a pace as if to
join the fight.

"What's happening?" Thokmay demanded, his hand reaching for the sword
that wasn't there.

"How dare he?  How *dare* he?"  The troll who had been speaking to
Noxy rocked forward and back.  "How *dare* he?"

"What? Who is it?" Noxy asked.

The troll bared her teeth.  "It's him.  It's Dragger.  And he's
brought his troop of dregs and misfits with him.  Do you hear me?" she
shouted into the trees, pounding the ground with her fists.  "Dregs
and *misfits*!"  Unable to contain herself any longer, she lunged into
the forest.

"Most respected!"  The trio spun around as Ulfmaerr burst out of the
bushes behind them.  He paused a heartbeat to catch his breath.  "Most
respected, quickly, we must flee."

"Run?  Again?" the prince asked bitterly.

"Yes," Ulfmaerr said urgently.  "The trolls will hold them here.  We
need to---"

A troll almost as big as Noxy exploded out of the trees.  Another
dropped from the branches above to tackle it.  The two creatures
grappled with each other, biting and snarling as they hit each other,
each trying to get a grip on the other's throat.

Ulfmaerr shouted a command.  Eerie green-white light billowed out of
the end of his staff like smoke.  The magician snapped the staff left,
right, and left again to drive off the trolls that were suddenly
pressing around them.  One got past him and knocked Thokmay to the
ground.  As Noxy pulled him to his feet, Kulbinder lunged past them at
a troll brandishing a heavy stick.  The club bounced off the tiger's
shoulder an instant before he sunk his teeth deep into the troll's
leg.  The hairy creature shrieked and swung his makeshift club at
Kulbinder, but the tiger had already pounced on another enemy.

The troll who had woken Noxy dropped to the ground in front of her,
the fur on her shoulder matted with blood.  "Go!" she ordered, pushing
Noxy toward the trees.

Noxy pulled up short as two more trolls swung down to the ground.  The
troll behind her pushed her forward again.  "Go!"  Even as she spoke,
the two newcomers threw themselves at the attacking trolls.

"Stay together!" Kulbinder snarled, slashing at a leg with his claws.

But they couldn't.  Dragger's trolls kept coming, wave after wave,
pushing Linger's loyalists back.  Ulfmaerr threw bursts of sticky
light at those nearest him, but even that wasn't enough to hold them
back.  Within moments Noxy and Thokmay had been driven into the
darkness beneath the pines.  Branches slapped their faces as they
fumbled their way forward, and roots clutched at their feet.

"I can't see a thing," Noxy said.

"Me neither."  Thokmay cupped his hands around his mouth.  "Kulbinder!"

The shout was barely out of his mouth when an enormous hairy arm
wrapped around Noxy.  Up she went into the trees, her struggles no
more effective than a baby's, up and up until suddenly the trolls who
had grabbed her were in the treetops.  Moonlight silvered the peaks
around her, and there, in the direction the trolls were carrying her,
a single cloud blotted out the stars.

There were trolls all around her, dozens of them, leaping from tree to
tree in a silence that was more frightening than hooting and shouting.
"Thokmay!" she shouted.  She tried to twist around to see if he was
behind her, but all she could see was a surge of dark-furred bodies.

A burst of green-white light erupted from the trees behind her,
followed by a chorus of screeches.  A second pillar of light burst
into the sky a moment later.  The fight was still going on, but who
was winning?

Without warning the trolls dove back into the trees.  A moment later
the trees ended abruptly a dozen strides from the edge of a dark lake.
The shore between the two was littered with rounded stones.  Some wore
coats of moss, but nothing else grew among them---no trees, no salal
bushes, not even a few stray flowers.

Her captor set her on her feet.  She spun around, intending to sprint
back into the trees, but froze as Dragger knuckle-walked out of the
trees.  "Bad idea." His voice was as deep as Kulbinder's but
infinitely more threatening.

"Where's Thokmay?" she demanded.

"Safe," the ogre said contemptuously.  He sat on the stones with his
legs in front of him in a curiously childlike posture.  "Now be
still.  We have guests."

She turned and looked over the lake.  The cloud she had seen from the
treetops was descending toward them.  Her breath caught.  It was
Pillow---she would recognize the old cow anywhere.

The cloud touched down on the lake, her flank spilling onto the stony
shore.  Colonel Bonzon slid down her side and straightened his uniform
jacket without so much as a glance at Noxy.  Two archers joined him,
weapons at the ready, and then the cloud's fourth rider joined them.
Noxy gasped in disbelief.

It was Grappa Gas.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 17: Sometimes You Don't Get To Choose

"Grappa?" she asked disbelievingly.  The old man raised his hand in a
weak wave, but didn't speak as Colonel Bonzon strode forward.  "You
promised the prince, not this girl."

The ogre snorted.  "And you said that your archers would end the
troll.  Stop there!"

Colonel Bonzon halted.  "I'm not going to steal her," he said
contemptuously.

"No you're not," the ogre agreed.  "But you are wearing iron."  He
jerked his thumb over his shoulder at the forest.  "No sense drawing
attention we don't want."

Colonel Bonzon drummed his fingers on the hilt of his sword.  "As you
wish.  Now, where is the prince?"

"Somewhere safe," the ogre said.  He picked up a rock and studied it.
"But that could change."

Colonel Bonzon's fingers stilled.  "He's no use to either of us dead."

The ogre grunted.  "I agree.  But he could be very useful as bait.
We'll string him up by the old bridge.  You can have him when Linger
is dead."  He surged to his feet more quickly than Noxy thought a
creature his size would have been able to move.  "Tell your men not to
miss this time."  He turned and knuckled back into the forest without
waiting for an answer.

"Stupid animal," Colonel Bonzon muttered under his breath once the
ogre was safely out of earshot.  He turned his hawk-sharp gaze on
Noxy.  "So, what am I to do with you?"

"How about surrendering?" Noxy said recklessly, crossing her arms and
doing her best to match his glare.

The corner of the colonel's mouth quirked momentarily.  "Just like
your mother.  No, I don't think we'll be surrendering."  His tone
turned serious.  "And you don't need to either.  We have no interest
in conquest.  All the most respected wants is to set people free."

"She has a strange way of showing it," Noxy said coldly.

Colonel Bonzon shook his head.  "No stranger than your parents making
you eat cabbage when you don't want to, or putting you to bed when you
want to stay up all night.  Slaves don't set themselves free because
they don't know what freedom is.  Someone needs to show them."

"We aren't slaves!" Noxy snapped.

The colonel's expression softened for a moment.  In someone else, Noxy
might have called it sadness.  "Do you know why we don't know what
water tastes like?" he asked quietly.  "It's because it's been in our
mouths since the day we were born."  He turned to walk back to the
cloud.  "Bring her," he said to the nearest archer.

The archer gestured with his bow.  Fuming, Noxy stalked toward the
cloud, cursing the colonel and the way the stones turning under her
feet made her stumble in equal measure.  She slowed as she neared
Grappa Gas, who hadn't moved during her exchange with Colonel Bonzon.

"What are you doing here?" she hissed, stopping and kneeling down to
fiddle with her bootlace.

"I didn't have a choice," he muttered back, anguish etched on his
face.

Noxy froze.  "Is everyone all right?"

Before Grappa Gas could answer, the bowman behind Noxy said, "Load up,
respected.  The colonel wants us moving."

She pulled herself up onto Pillow and sat cross-legged as far away
from Colonel Bonzon as she safely could.  The colonel ignored her.
"Get us out of here," he ordered.  With a nod, Grappa Gas laid a
gentle hand on Pillow.  A moment later the cloud rose gently into the
air and turned east.

The moon's scarred face looked down on them as they flew toward the
unborn sunrise.  Noxy lay back with her fingers laced behind her head,
letting herself sink into the cloud to get out of the wind.  When she
had been little, four stars just below the moon had formed an
almost-perfect square.  They had moved far enough since then that they
now made a slightly uneven diamond.  A Hett trader who dabbled in
fortune telling had said that meant the world was due for a big
change, but Granna Fee had laughed when Noxy told her.  "The world's
always changing," she had said, kissing the top of her granddaughter's
head, "And it's always big for someone."

Noxy yawned and rubbed her gritty eyes.  There was nothing she could
do until they got wherever they were going.  *And probably nothing
even then,* she admitted to herself glumly.  She might as well sleep.

She yawned again, stretched, and rolled onto her side.  She had slept
on clouds more times than she could count.  It was the most
comfortable bed in the world as long as she pillowed her head on her
arm so that her face didn't sink in.  She patted Pillow
affectionately, hoping yet again that Big Blue was all right.

*Good?* Pillow mind-asked.

*Good,* Noxy replied muzzily.

The cloud was silent for a moment, and then, *Others?*

Noxy blinked.  *What?*

*Others?* Pillow repeated timidly.  *He asks.*

Noxy's eyes snapped open.  He?  That could only be Grappa Gas.  He
must be using Pillow to pass messages so that the soldiers couldn't
hear.

She closed her eyes.  *I don't know,* she mind-spoke.  *They were
fighting.  We got separated.*

There was a long pause before Pillow mind-asked, *Why were they
fighting?*

Noxy repressed a sigh.  This was going to take a while...

Slowly, with many repeats and misunderstandings, she told Grappa Gas
what had happened since she had fled Stale while he filled her in on
events in the village.  Everyone had to stay in their houses except
the children---they were all in the "people pen", which she guessed
meant the trading hall.  Pillow seemed puzzled by how shocked and
angry Noxy was when she mind-heard that.  *People always do to clouds
in spring,* she observed, shaping an image of cloudherds separating
year-old calves from their mothers during the annual roundup.

*But why are you herding for the rebels?* Noxy asked.  It took three
tries to get Pillow to understand---eventually, Noxy had to turn the
question into, *Why Grappa Gas follows big bull soldier?*

The reply that came back chilled her more than the night wind.  *Aft
hurt.*  Pillow didn't use his name, but her mental picture was clear:
big, always arguing, and fiercely in love with the clouds he rode.
There was no one else it could be.

*How?  Ask him how?*  Noxy demanded.

Before Pillow could pass on the question, Grappa Gas spoke aloud.
"There's the bridge," he told the colonel, pointing.  "Do you want me
to set her down?"

"No.  Bring us close, but don't touch anything, not even the
treetops."  The colonel had his hands clasped behind his back as if
reviewing a parade.  If he felt the cold, he didn't show it.

He turned to his men.  "Get ready," he ordered.

"Yes, respected," they said in unison.  One opened a pack, took out a
jug, and began sprinkling its contents on his hands and wiping them on
his partner's face, clothes, and boots.

"Kills their scent," Colonel Bonzon told Noxy.  "Standard when you're
dealing with the Gifted."  As the first soldier began anointing
himself, the second pulled a coil of rope from the pack.

As Pillow descended, Noxy could finally see a sparse patch in the
forest left by a long-ago fire.  The trees in it were crowded together
but half the height of their older siblings.  A few blackened spires
still rose in their midst, too proud to fall over even after death.

An ancient stone bridge straddled the narrow river that ran across one
half of the clearing.  Still deep in shadow, its heavily-mossed sides
made it look like some great shaggy beast.  It had to be the work of
the Pilots, Noxy realized.  No one else would have dared build
anything so deep in the forest.

"There."  The colonel pointed at a tall pine on the edge of the
clearing.  With a mind-spoken command, Grappa Gas steered Pillow
toward it.  A few moments later, the first of the archers slid down
the rope to conceal himself in its branches.  The second followed suit
a few dozen heartbeats later and fifty strides away.  When Noxy looked
back, the first archer was already lost to view.

"Late as usual," the colonel muttered under his breath.  Noxy
scrambled to Pillow's flank to look.  At first she couldn't see
anything, but then she caught a flash of motion between the
densely-packed young trees.  Another, another, another...  Dozens of
trolls were picking their way through the densely-packed young trees
toward the bridge like minnows swimming through weeds.

She caught her breath.  There---that was Dragger.  And the struggling
bundle on his shoulder could only be Thokmay.

She spun around.  "Do you really think Linger's going to be stupid
enough to come after him?" she spat at Colonel Bonzon.

The colonel smiled coldly.  "What makes you think I give a damn about
the troll?"  Before Noxy could reply, he began unbuttoning his uniform
jacket.  Handing it to a waiting soldier, he slipped his arms into a
climbing harness while another soldier reeled in the rope that the two
archers had used to lower themselves to their perches.  All the while,
he kept his eyes on the scene below, studying it the way a hawk would
study a meadow full of grazing rabbits.

Dragger reached the bridge.  Beside it, a defiant spire of blackened
wood still reached for the sky.  It had tilted slightly as the river
wore away the soil beneath its root, but didn't budge when Dragger
shoved it.  The ogre braced himself against it with Thokmay still
struggling on his shoulder.  One by one a trio of trolls scrambled up
his back and leaped into the still-sturdy boughs.  The last turned
upside down, feet tight around the wood, and took hold of Thokmay as
Dragger passed him up.

"Higher... come on, a little higher..." Colonel Bonzon muttered as the
trolls lifted the prince up the tree.  The last of the tree slung him
unceremoniously over a branch.  The prince had stopped struggling by
then, no doubt mindful of the long drop to the forest floor.

"Respected?" one of the soldiers asked.

The colonel scowled.  "It will have to do.  You!"  he snapped at
Grappa Gas.  "Bring us around to the east, then back across the prince
to my men.  I want a trotting pace, no more and no less, and about..."
He eyed the rope.  "About ten strides above the tree."

"Ten strides?" Grappa Gas asked, sounding incredulous.  "Respected,
the cloud won't like that---one slip and she'll scrape her belly clean
off!"  Which was nonsense, Noxy knew, but if the colonel didn't...

His snort told her that he did.  Instead of replying, he drew his
sword in a fluid motion born of much practice.  "Now."

Pillow turned in a tight arc.  Below, Dragger and his trolls looked
up.  A few pointed while others scrambled back to the old growth.  The
ogre bared his teeth but didn't move.

"Left," Colonel Bonzon ordered.  "A little more.  Now straight.  Hold
it straight, and keep this speed.  Anchors ready?"

"Ready, respected," the two soldiers replied in unison.  They had
taken up positions to form the base of a triangle, the rope passing
first around the back of one then the other.  They had donned gloves
at some point as well, Noxy realized, and with that thought the pieces
came together and she realized what Colonel Bonzon was going to do
just as he took two quick steps and threw himself off the cloud.

The rope sizzled through the soldiers' hands.  "Brake!" he shouted.
Grunting, the two men tightened their grip.  Their feet slid forward
as if they were trying to brace themselves on thick snow.  Noxy
mind-heard Pillow's squeal of complaint as they dug their feet in
deeper to stop themselves and the colonel.

*Twang!* *Twang!* Two bows fired almost in unison.  Noxy felt flat on
Pillow and wriggled forward just in time to see two of the trolls in
the tree in front of them fall lifeless to the ground below.  *Twang!*
One of the archers hidden in the forest fired again, but the third
troll had flung itself onto the far side of the burned tree.  Its howl
of fear and rage was instantly echoed by the trolls below.

"Two strides!" the colonel bellowed.  The soldiers on Pillow's back
let a double length of rope slide through their hands, dropping him
just enough for his chest to crash against the branch that the prince
was laid across.  He grabbed the prince's belt and kicked off the
trunk of the tree, throwing the pair of them sideways around the end
of the branch.  The prince shouted, arms and legs waving wildly.
Colonel Bonzon slashed once with his sword at the troll as it lunged
toward him, and then he and the prince were clear.

"Haul!  Haul, damn you, haul!"  The soldiers were already reeling him
in.  A third man threw himself full-length onto Pillow's back and
wriggled forward as if trying to rescue someone who had fallen through
thin ice.  He reached for the colonel's hand, but the rope was digging
into Pillow, cutting her.

"She's giving way!" Noxy shouted.  Pillow was pulling back from the
rope, peeling away on either side like a bale of wool being cut with a
knife.  Noxy grabbed the soldiers' pack and shoved it under the rope.

The soldier caught the colonel's hand.  With a "Hwah!" of effort he
lifted the prince and pushed him forward.  "Take him!" he shouted.
The soldier grabbed Thokmay's collar with his other hand and held on.

"Pull him up, damn you!" the colonel yelled.  "I've got to get the
men!"  And with that he was gone, falling again as Pillow flew toward
the nearest archer, a horde of howling trolls crashing through the
trees below in pursuit.

The soldier dragged Thokmay up onto Pillow as his two companions let
the rope run through their hands a stride at a time.  Colonel Bonzon
shouted something unintelligible as he swung beneath the cloud,
kicking and waving his arms in a vain attempt to stop himself from
spinning.

For a long moment Noxy couldn't see his target, but there!  The
archer hidden in the tree swept aside his ragged poacher's cape, slung
his bow over his shoulder, and leaped into the air to grab the
colonel's swordbelt.  "Haul!" the colonel shouted.

A few heartbeats later the archer scrambled up onto the cloud and
rolled over onto his back, lungs heaving.  The colonel dropped for the
third and final time.

But even as he swung beneath the cloud, the trolls below spotted the
second archer.  They surged toward his tree like a gray flood.
Dragger reared up and pounded his chest, roaring a challenge at the
colonel as the archer fired and fired again until he was out of
arrows.  He was trying to draw his sword when the trolls reached him,
and then it was over.

His lifeless body hit the ground a few heartbeats later.

"Haul up!" the colonel shouted.  His soldiers pulled him back onto the
cloud.  For a moment everyone just sat there and panted for breath.

Colonel Bonzon looked at the prince with no more emotion in his eyes
than a stone.  "You'd better be worth it," he said coldly.  Before
Thokmay could reply, he turned to Grappa Gas.  "Get us back to Stale."

Noxy wiped angry tears from her eyes.  Thokmay wasn't even bothering
to do that.  He just let them run, two glistening tracks down his
cheeks, one smooth and one interrupted by the scars Kulbinder had
given him.  On impulse, Noxy leaned against him, then put her arm
around his shoulders and squeezed.  She had no idea what to say, but
he leaned back against her anyway.

They rode in silence as a new day brightened around them.  Noxy laid
her hand on Pillow and closed her eyes so that she could see what the
cloud was seeing.  Forest stretched out in all directions below them,
interrupted only by the sparkling thread of the little river.  There
was another lake ahead, and probably another after that, on and on
until the water reached a river that people knew well enough to name.
It wouldn't be the Tangrapriye---that lay on the other side of the
Brumosos.  Maybe the Trout?  She had learned all of the rivers' names
as a little girl, poring over maps with Rash and Sensy as they planned
the journeys they would take together when they were older.

*All right?* Pillow mind-asked.

*No,* Noxy replied, and then, *Thank you for asking.*  She couldn't
remember if she had ever thanked a cloud before.

*Beside water,* Pillow mind-said a moment later.  *Ahead.*

Noxy blinked.  *What?*

*He says, beside water,* Pillow repeated.  *Ahead.*  She paused.
*Sharp feet with,* she added disapprovingly.

Noxy's heart missed a beat.  "Kulbinder?" she breathed.  Thokmay
stiffened under her arm, but didn't raise his head.

*Sharp feet,* Pillow confirmed.  *With old voice.* The picture the
cloud's thoughts formed in Noxy's mind was like a majestic old bull
stretching from horizon to horizon, but covered in gray fur.  It could
only be Linger.

*He asks, can you?* As Pillow passed on the question, Grappa Gas
turned to look at her.  Noxy didn't know how much of the mental
conversation he could overhear.  Or what he would do, she realized,
her heart aching.  She loved the old man.  After her father left, he
had taken her down to the pond every morning for weeks to feed the
fish and told her one improbable story after another.  She could only
imagine what he must be feeling---what the soldiers must have
threatened to do to Aft to make him do their bidding.  She didn't want
to hurt him, but sometimes you didn't get to choose.

She laid her head on Thokmay's shoulder.  "You really can't swim?" she
asked quietly.

"Just a little," Thokmay replied.  When one of the soldiers looked
over, he began to stroke her hair slowly, as if he was stroking
Kulbinder's ears.  The soldier's stern expression softened slightly
and he went back to watching the forest slide by beneath them.

"Try to fall straight," Noxy murmured.  "And cross your legs.  The
boys always say, cross your legs."

She felt him freeze as he realized what she was planning.  It had only
been a few days since he had almost drowned.  Would he---

"Thanks for the warning," he said, and this time when Noxy squeezed
his shoulders, she meant it.

A hundred strides... Fifty...  They were over the lake.  Noxy couldn't
see Linger or Kulbinder through Pillow's eyes, but she could feel the
old troll's presence.  How could she ever have missed it?  Pillow was
right---he was as big as a cloud.

*Must be quick,* she told Pillow, shaping a picture in her head.  *As
quick as lightning.* She stood.  Thokmay stood beside her and took her
hand.

Colonel Bonzon's head snapped around.  "Sit down," he ordered.

Noxy looked him in the eye and smiled.  "I don't think so," she said,
and *Now!* she told Pillow.  Grappa Gas shouted something, a warning
or a plea that she didn't hear, as the cloud beneath her weakened and
thinned and pulled back, and then she and Thokmay were falling toward
the freezing blue water below.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 18: The Voice of the Forest

Twenty strides is a long way to fall.  It's long enough to wonder how
cold the water is going to be and whether it will be deep enough or
whether you are going to break a leg.  It's certainly long enough to
think, "This was probably a bad idea."

Noxy and the prince hit the water at almost the same instant.  She
struggled to the surface, barely able to breathe as the freezing water
seemed to wrap its icy hands around her chest and squeeze.  "Thokmay!"
she shouted---or tried to.  All that came out was a weak shuddering
gasp.

Thokmay broke the surface two strides away.  "Help!" he spluttered,
flailing his arms.

"H-hold on!" Noxy's teeth were already chattering.  Her waterlogged
boots were pulling her down.  Her coat felt as heavy as a rock.  They
were too far from shore.  She would never be able to make it on her
own, much less dragging the prince behind her.

She kicked toward him anyway and grabbed his arm.  He clutched her
sleeve, eyes wide with fear, but didn't try to climb onto her the way
she had heard drowners sometimes did.  It was so cold.  Spots swam in
front of her eyes.  "I'm sorry," she gasped.

"B-b-b-" The prince couldn't get the word out, but he could point over
her shoulder.  She tried to turn her head to look, but her neck
wouldn't obey her.

Something rose beneath her, lifting her out of the water.  She let go
of the prince and dug her fingers into its thick, sleek fur.  She had
only moment to wonder what was happening before a second bear broke
the surface underneath the prince and began swimming for shore with
their passengers shivering on their backs.

*Sssst!* *Sploosh!* An arrow hit the water a stride away.  Noxy heard
Colonel Bonzon shout angrily.  Grappa Gas shouted back.  *Faster
faster faster,* she thought desperately, digging her fingers into the
bear's fur.  She was shivering uncontrollably---the wind on her wet
clothes was even colder than the water had been.

A second arrow splooshed into the lake, and then the bear beneath her
wasn't swimming any longer, it was surging up a pebbled beach and into
the trees with its companion a stride behind it.  *I hope Thokmay
managed to hold on,* she thought blearily as her numb hands finally
lost their grip.  She slid sideways off the bear's back and landed in
a crumpled, cramped heap on the forest floor.

Strong hands picked her up.  Something yellow shone on her face as her
boots and coat were pulled off.  It was warm, but she was too cold to
feel it yet.  Someone lifted her into a sitting position and put a mug
to her lips.  "Drink this.  Daffodil, please, drink---we need to warm
you inside as well."

Whatever it was hurt going down.  She tried to push it away but the
voice said, "No, drink it all."

She blinked.  Ulfmaerr pressed the mug into her hands.  "Drink it
all," he repeated.  She tried to say, "Thank you," but her tongue
wouldn't obey her.  He had already turned away to minister to Thokmay,
who was pressed against Kulbinder, shivering.

A piece of dayglass lay on the ground beside them, shining
yellow-bright.  It took her a moment to realize that the heat was
coming from it as well.  *Magic,* she realized blearily.

Only then did she realize that the lumps on the other side of the
dayglass were two bears and a troll.  She forced herself to swallow
another mouthful of the scalding tea and said, "Thank you."

"Hane dank," Linger replied.  He scratched the nearest bear behind the
ears.  The bear rumbled, rose to its feet and nudged its companion
with its shoulder.

"He says you're welcome," Ulfmaerr translated, passing a second mug of
tea to Thokmay.

"And thank you too," Noxy called to the retreating bears as they
disappeared into the trees.

Linger bared his teeth in a grin.  Ulfmaerr coughed, embarrassed.
"They aren't actually Gifted."

They sat in silence after that, three humans, a tiger, and a troll.
Noxy knew there must be other trolls in the woods around them, but she
didn't care.  She didn't care about anything except the warmth coming
from the tea and the dayglass.  She wondered what the spell on the
latter must have cost her father.  Could he no longer see the color
red?  Or taste cinnamon?  Or ask directions of strangers?  Magicians
took care to trade away only those things they could do without, but
over a lifetime, those little losses added up.  Was she going to have
to pay a price for being able to mind-talk to faraway clouds?  And to
the forest?  *Probably,* she thought bitterly, *And I probably won't
get to bargain over it.*

Thokmay was the first to stir.  "You all right?" he asked.

"I guess," Noxy said.

"Yes, respected," Kulbinder said at the same time.  He blinked and
looked away.  "After you, please."

"How about you?" Noxy asked the prince.

"Nothing broken."  He forced a weak smile.  "But if we're going to
keep doing this, I really should learn how to swim."  He struggled to
his feet and held out his hand.  "Come on.  Dragger's pack will be
here soon."

She took his hand and pulled herself up.  "I'm so tired of running and
hiding."

The prince clapped her on the shoulder.  "It gets easier with
practice.  Trust me."

Linger led the way.  Neither Noxy or the prince asked where they were
going.  They barely even looked up when branches rustled overhead, or
when Kulbinder disappeared in the trees every few hundred strides to
check behind them.  Ulfmaerr muttered to himself from time to time,
whether to cast a spell or just because he'd been living on his own
for so long, Noxy couldn't tell.

The house took Noxy completely by surprise.  One moment all she could
see was the path, rocky and muddy in turn, so narrow that brushes
caught at their shoulders even though they were walking single file.
The next moment, the trees ended as abruptly as if someone had cut a
hole out of a carpet with a knife.

The clearing was perhaps twenty strides across, and roughly square.
The house was---Noxy blinked.  The house was *her* house, the house
she and her mother shared in Stale, right down to the slightly
discolored patch next to the door where Rash had thrown an egg at her
while she was painting it but hit the wall instead.

She started to step forward, but Thokmay caught her arm.  "Wait," he
said in a low voice.  "There could be sentries in the tower.  Or
archers."

Noxy blinked.  "The tower?  What tower?"

Thokmay jerked his chin toward the house.  "*That* tower."  He studied
the scene with a scowl.  "It looks just like the one outside Panday.
Look---you see that window?  There's a set-back inside so someone can
stand watch without being seen from the ground."

Belatedly, the prince realized that Noxy was studying his face instead
of the window he was pointing at.  "What?"

She looked from him to the house and back.  "Thokmay, I don't see a
tower.  I see my house."

"Tha sen wat tha nedich a sen," Linger said from behind them.  "Al wat
het wald tha nedichin a sen."

"He says you see what you need to see," Ulfmaerr filled in.  "Or what
the forest needs you to see."  He had his staff in both hands, at rest
but ready.

"So it's magic," the prince said flatly.

Ulfmaerr shook his head.  "No kind of spell I know, or any other
magician that walks on two legs.  This is the forest's doing."  He
glanced at Linger, who was waiting patiently, then dug into his pocket.
"Here."  He held out a handful of hard red berries.  "They're not
much, but you'll want something in your stomach before you go and talk
to it.  The forest," he continued when Noxy looked at him blankly.
"That's why we're here.  The forest wants to talk to you."

There was a moment of silence.  "And the... the tower?  Or house, or
whatever it is?" Thokmay asked.

Ulfmaerr shrugged.  "Its way of making you feel at home, I suppose."
He brightened.  "Or possibly a trap.  That would be the real stuff of
stories, wouldn't it?"

Thokmay looked at Noxy.  She rolled her eyes.  "Come on," she said
wearily.  "We might as well---"

"No."  Ulfmaerr held out his staff to prevent Thokmay from stepping
into the clearing, but kept his eyes on his daughter.  "It only wants
to talk to *you*."

"And what if *I* don't want to talk to *it*?" Noxy asked quietly in a
voice that had sent her friends in Stale running for cover more than
once.

Ulfmaerr shrugged again.  "I don't think you have much of a choice."
He pointed back the way they had come.

The trail had vanished.  Kulbinder rumbled deep in his chest, his ears
flat and his tail bristling.  He took one step toward the dense
undergrowth that had somehow appeared behind them before stopping
himself.  "I don't like this," he growled.

"Et is net foar than a lik," Linger said firmly.  "Et is foar than a
dae."  He gave Noxy a gentle push.

Noxy took a deep breath, let it out, and strode toward the house that
looked so much like hers.

The clearing was silent except for the soft shush of her legs through
grass and ferns.  No birds sang, and the ever-present background buzz
of forest insects was gone.  When she glanced over her shoulder, her
companions seemed to be frozen in place, their expressions betraying a
mix of curiosity and concern.

She hesitated when she reached the front door, then knocked three
times.  No one answered, so she pushed the door open and stepped
inside.

"Hello dear.  Would you like some tea?"  The old woman sitting at the
kitchen table wore a goofskin vest over a heavy gray sweater that
would have passed unremarked in Stale.  Her face was the same dark
shade as Granna Fee's, and her gray hair twisted into two heavy
braids, but her eyes were clouded by milky cataracts.

"No thank you," Noxy said.  "Are you---are you the spirit of the
forest?"

The old woman smiled gently.  "That's rather like asking if you're the
spirit of you."  She tilted her head to the side in a gesture that
reminded Noxy of a small bird.  "Which I suppose would be a fair
question right now, all things considered.  Please, sit down."

Noxy pulled a stool---*her* stool---out from under the table and sat.
"I'm sorry for all the trouble you had getting here," the old woman
continued.  "It would have been a lot easier for both of us if we'd
been able to take this slowly, but events seem to have taken on a life
of their own, haven't they?"

"I suppose," Noxy said uncertainly.  "What---I'm sorry.  What am I
doing here, exactly?"

The old woman's smile broadened.  "You're very direct.  I like that."
She leaned forward, her elbow on the table and her chin on her hand.
She drummed her fingers on her cheek for a moment, her blind eyes
drilling into Noxy, then sat back and sighed.

"Well, how to put this?" she mused.  "This is... I suppose you'd call
it an audition of sorts.  Lingers Hopefully Where Ripe Fruit Has Been
Found In The Past is getting on a bit---I mean, six hundred and eighty
winters is a fair run for one of you warm-bloods---so it's high time
we started training his replacement.  It requires someone with some
special talents, and the right sort of character.  Are *you* the right
sort?"  She leaned forward, her eyes bright and curious.

"I... Um, I don't know?"  Noxy shook her head, bewildered.  "What sort
are you looking for?  And what do you mean, his replacement?"

The old woman nodded.  "Those are good questions.  For the first, I
need someone who is audacious, curious, unflappable, wickedly
intelligent, completely trustworthy, has a wonderful sense of humor,
and obedient.  Obedience is the hard one," she confided, stirring her
tea with the tip of her little finger and then wiping it on a scrap of
cloth that Noxy hadn't noticed before.

"And replacement?" Noxy prompted, wondering if this was some sort of
strange dream.

"No, dear, it's very real.  This," the old woman elaborated, waving
her tea-damp pinky to take in the cottage and its contents.  "It's as
real as the end of the world.  Which," she continued, raising her tea
to her lips but not sipping, "Brings us quite neatly to your second
question.  My friends and I need this world to keep on sailing, and
that means occasionally... taking steps."  The distaste she put into
the last two words made her sound more than a little bit like Granna
Fee talking about what came out of the back end of Stale's goofs.

Noxy opened her mouth, not sure which of her dozen questions would
come out first.  Before she could speak, the old woman leaned forward
again and gently covered Noxy's hand with hers.

*The forest.  On and on, the forest.  It stretched from the northern
slopes of the Brumoso Mountains in the south to Cape Grind in the
north, and from the Gulf of Plangentia along the Heladas to Uws.  But
those were human names.  What Noxy saw/tasted/felt was the soil, dark
and slightly tangy where thousands of years of fallen wood had turned
to duff and then rotted into soil.  The tiny trickles of water, too
small even for squirrels to notice, that joined and joined again to
become streams and rivers.  The sun, the beasts, the clouds, the
nameless, shapeless things that stirred occasionally in their sleep in
caverns deep below the surface.*

*And there, to the south, a jungle.  Loud where the forest was quiet,
quick where the forest was slow, with a joke or a cruel quip always
ready, but grieving now, grieving for centuries, half-mad with loss
and rage and sorrow.*

It was too much, too big for a mind that could fit inside a skull.
Noxy felt herself falling helplessly.

"Sh, sh, sh," the old woman said, patting Noxy's hand comfortingly.
"It's all right, we're back.  Are you sure you don't want some tea?"

Noxy drew a shaky breath and wiped at tears she hadn't realized she
was crying.  "What---what happened?"

"The dragon came," the old woman said.  "The Pilots did what they
could, but..."  She shook her head sadly.  "Sometimes what you can do
isn't enough.  And in the end, they did as much harm as the dragon.
You see, there were three of us once, but now we are only two, and the
jungle misses him so much."

"I'm sorry," Noxy whispered.

The old woman---no, the forest, Noxy thought dumbly, I'm talking to
the forest---patted her hand again.  "It's all right, dear.  You can
get used to anything if you have to.  It's just taking the jungle a
while, that's all."

Noxy wiped her face again.  "So what do you need me to do?"

The forest sat back in her chair.  "As I said, Lingers Hopefully Where
Ripe Fruit Has Been Found In The Past isn't getting any younger.  I'm
sure he'll be all right for another century or so, but that's not
really very long when you think about it, is it?  And he'd like to
slow down a bit, too.  Putting rebellious ogres in their place and
chasing after stray princes, well, it's more a young person's sort of
thing, wouldn't you say?"

"I guess," Noxy agreed doubtfully.  "So you want me to...?"

The forest spread her hands.  "To be the voice of the forest, dear.
To be my hands in the world."  Her voice hardened.  "And to remind
those who wield iron and fire that they are *not* welcome.  I may be
getting on a bit myself, but I'm not about to start tolerating that
sort of nonsense."

"So Linger's your, your voice?" Noxy asked.  She felt like she was
back in the lake, struggling to get her head above water.  "And that's
why he's six hundred years old?"

"Six hundred and eighty two," the forest nodded.

Noxy stared at her, then shook her head violently.  "No.  No way.  I
mean, thank you, but no.  I mean, what about my friends, and *amma*?
I don't want to..."  She laughed shakily.  "I'd be as lonely as the
jungle if I lived that long."

"Ah ha!" the forest said triumphantly.  "I *knew* you were
intelligent.  Most of those I interview take a lot longer to think
that part through.  But no," she continued, "You won't be lonely, not
unless you want to be.  You can trade away missing people for all
sorts of useful magic.  And anyway, you'll always have me.  And the
jungle too when it calms down," she added as an afterthought.  "It's
actually quite funny."

Noxy stood up.  "Thank you very much," she said, folding her hands
together formally the way Granna Fee had taught her, "But I really
don't think this is what I want."  She bowed, counting to three slowly
under her breath before straightening up again.

The forest stood.  "Well, I can't say I'm not disappointed, but
there's plenty of time for you to reconsider.  And speaking of
time..."  She glanced out a window that wasn't there in Noxy's house,
and which hadn't been there a moment before.  "I think you should be
getting back.  Your friends are starting to worry about you."

"Thank you again," Noxy said.  "I'm very flattered."

"As you should be," the forest said, but she smiled as she said it.
"If you do change your mind, you know where to find me."  As Noxy
turned to go, the forest added, "Besides, you may find you have less
choice than you think."

Noxy turned back, wanting to ask what the forest meant, but she wasn't
in the house any more.  She was on her back with her coat draped over
her to keep her warm and her father snoring softly on the forest floor
beside her.

She tried to sit up.  Her arms and legs were strangely heavy, but her
head felt as light as a cloud.  "Hey."  Thokmay appeared from behind
her and crouched down to put his hand on her forehead.  "How are you
feeling?"

"..."  Noxy cleared her throat and tried again.  "What happened?"

Thokmay handed her a canteen full of lukewarm water, concern written
on his face.  It was dark, she realized, or getting there---she could
barely make out his face.  "You froze.  Sort of," he amended, taking
the canteen back and swirling it around before swallowing a mouthful
and settling cross-legged on the forest floor.  "You started to walk
over to the tower, then you just...  stopped.  Ulfmaerr said not to
worry, but when night came, he thought we ought to---"

"Wait."  Noxy held up her hand.  "How long was I, um, how long has it
been?"

Thokmay studied her.  "We got here yesterday morning.  You stood there
all day until Ulfmaerr got you to lie down.  It was like you were
sleepwalking.  Your eyes were open, but you weren't really seeing
anything.  Oh, here."  He pulled a small bundle of his pocket and
unwrapped it to reveal a handful of salmonberries.  "He said you'd be
hungry when you woke up."

She was, Noxy realized.  In fact, she was ravenous.  She popped two of
the thumb-sized yellow berries in her mouth, wincing at their
sourness, and began gobbling the rest.  "'ank you," she said as she
chewed.  "So what ha'ened 'en?"

Thokmay shrugged.  "Nothing.  Linger disappeared, and Ulfmaerr said we
just had to wait, so Kulbinder went hunting."

Noxy swallowed.  "And you stayed here?  Aww---that's sweet."  She
leaned forward and punched him gently in the shoulder.

"Well, don't get used to it."  He fished a second bundle of berries
out of his other pocket and passed it to her.  "The cloud flew by
twice today, and I heard trolls in the trees too.  I think there's
some kind of spell to keep us hidden, but who knows how long it's
going to last?"

"As long as the forest wants it to."  Noxy and the prince both jumped
at the sound of Ulfmaerr's voice.  He propped himself up on one elbow.
"Which is to say, it's probably already gone.  We should get moving."

"And go where?" Noxy asked wearily.  Despite the berries, she was so
hungry that she felt a little sick.  She just wanted to be home.

Whatever Ulfmaerr might have said was cut off by a roar of, "Most
respected!"  Kulbinder burst out of the bushes three strides away and
pulled up short at the sight of Noxy.

"Finally," he growled.  His ears were flat against his head, and his
whiskers bristling.  "Most respected, it's Dragger.  He's headed this
way, and I don't think Linger can stop him."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 19: The Gray Flood

So they fled once again.  Later, Noxy would barely remember it.  She
must have stumbled---how else could she have gotten so much dirt on
her hands and knees---and a branch must have caught her in the face to
leave the scratch that took two weeks to heal, but it all blurred
together into one long waking nightmare.

A troop of trolls ambushed them.  Other trolls drove them off, hooting
and howling.  They splashed through a stream, the water almost cold
enough to snap her out of her daze, only to double back and splash
through it again when Kulbinder raced back to warn them of another
ambush ahead.

The narrow deer track they were following went up a hill.  Noxy had to
grab a tree when she reached the top to stop herself from tumbling
into a sinkhole thirty strides deep where the ground had collapsed
centuries ago into one of the countless underground caverns that lay
beneath the surface of the world.  "Look out!" she told Thokmay,
putting out her arm to stop him.  The hole was almost square, its
edges covered in bushes where the soil was too thin to anchor the
roots of trees.

Thokmay kicked a small rock.  A few heartbeats later, they heard a
*sploosh* as it reached the dark pool at the bottom of the sinkhole.
"Well, I guess we're not going that way," he panted.

Ulfmaerr peered over his shoulder.  "Best not," he agreed.  He was
breathing hard too, and his beard was matted with sweat.  Propping his
staff against a tree, he unslung his canteen, raised it to his lips,
then hesitated.

"Here," he said, passing it to the prince.  "You two finish it.  No,
please."  He waved away the prince's protest and pointed across the
sinkhole.  "We'll go around to that stream and refill it."

The silence that followed was broken by an all-too-familiar hooting in
the distance.  Ulfmaerr cursed softly.

"We're not going to make it, are we?" Thokmay said quietly.

Ulfmaerr hesitated before shaking his head.  "I don't think.  Linger's
doing what he can, but I think Dragger has a lot more followers than
even the forest realized."  He frowned.  "Which is almost as worrying
as the thought of being torn limb from limb."

Noxy felt a twinge in the back of her head.  "Pillow's back," she
said, waving her hand vaguely to indicate a direction as if it
mattered.

The prince straightened.  "Will they hear us if we call out?"

Noxy looked up, puzzled.  "Maybe."  Then the look on his face sunk
in.  "Oh no," she said.  "You are *not* giving yourself up to them."

"It's them or the trolls," he said calmly.  "And I think they're a lot
less likely to tear us apart.  We can't keep running," he continued as
Noxy opened her mouth, "And they're a lot less likely to dismember us
than the what's chasing us down here.  Besides, if you can do whatever
magic it is you do with the cloud again, maybe we can escape a second
time."

"It's not magic," Noxy said automatically.  "And it would be the third
time, remember?"

The corner of Thokmay's mouth lifted in a momentary half-smile.  "My
apologies, respected.  I'd lost count.  But if nothing else, it would
be nice to lie down on a cloud and get some real sleep."

"I'm afraid that's not very likely," Ulfmaerr said.  "Dragger's not
likely to give you to the colonel after what happened last time.  And
he's even less likely to treat you well after the forest showed you
such favor.  He's rather the jealous sort, you see."

Pieces fell into place in Noxy's head.  "He was supposed to replace
Linger, wasn't he?"

Ulfmaerr waggled his head, neither yes nor no.  "It spoke to him.
That's all I know."

A bush rustled three strides away.  Kulbinder stepped into the light,
blinked at them, and sat on his haunches to begin cleaning a bloody
scratch on his shoulder with his tongue.

Thokmay half-smiled again.  "He likes to make an entrance," he
whispered loudly to Noxy, rolling his eyes.

The tiger gave his shoulder one last lick, stretched, and padded over
to join the trio.  "If you lot are done with your holiday," he said
drily, "There's something you should see."

Noxy was beyond caring about the noise they made as they waded through
the waist-high salal and ossefra that carpeted the sinkhole's edge.
Kulbinder kept outpacing them and then pausing, his tail twitching
with impatience, while they caught up.

After a hundred strides or so, the tiger led them into the forest
again.  They climbed a small rise and came down the other side to find
a second sinkhole, smaller than the first but just as deep.  The
ground they had just been walking on was a bridge, Noxy realized.
Then she shrugged.  It had held up for centuries---it wasn't likely to
fall down just because she was on it, and anyway, they had bigger
things to worry about.

"Softly now," the tiger rumbled.  "And don't startle them."  He moved
forward in a silent crouch that would have been terrifying if Noxy
hadn't been looking at his rear end.

The sides of this sinkhole were covered in the same bushes and
brambles as the one they had first seen, but it smelled like the floor
of the goofs' barn in Stale after they'd been shut in for the winter.
"Eww," Noxy said under her breath.  Thokmay glanced at her and mimed
holding his nose.

"There," Kulbinder said quietly.  "Watch."

Something stirred in the shadows of the sinkhole's far wall where a
cascade of bushes straggled down.  Something else moved a few strides
away.  There and there and there, up and down the wall, small gray
shapes were climbing up and down, popping into crevices in the rock
only to emerge a few strides away.

Noxy's heart missed a beat.  "Saints," she whispered.  "We have to get
out of here."

"Why?  What is it?" Thokmay whispered back.

"It's a squirrel nest."  Noxy glared at Kulbinder in disbelief.  "Are
you crazy?"

Thokmay looked from her to Kulbinder and back.  "What's wrong with a
few squirrels?"

"These aren't lowland squirrels, most respected," the tiger said.  "Up
here, the squirrels have teeth."

"There are a lot of them," Ulfmaerr observed cautiously.  "Do you
think they know we're here?"

Instead of answering, Kulbinder looked up.  Noxy followed his gaze.  A
small gray squirrel clung to the trunk of a twisted pine a few strides
away, its head turned to watch them.  A second squirrel sat on a
branch above it.

"Well, at least the trolls will leave us alone for a while," Ulfmaerr
said, seating himself on the ground with his staff across his knees.

"But then what?" Noxy asked despairingly.  "We can't go forward, we
can't go back, and we can't just sit here---what's left?"

The squirrels looked up in unison as a shadow fell across them.  The
foursome slipped back under the trees as a cloud passed overhead.
Noxy closed her eyes for a moment, then relaxed.  "It's not Pillow,"
she told the others.  "It's just a calf separated from its herd."
A calf separated from its herd...

"Noxy?"

She blinked.  "Excuse me?"

"You've had an idea, haven't you?" Thokmay asked patiently.

Noxy nodded.  "Yup.  But you're not going to like it."

She quickly outlined her plan, glossing over the really dangerous
bits.  Kulbinder growled a couple of times, but didn't object.
Ulfmaerr's frown deepened the longer Noxy spoke, but he didn't object
either.  And all Thokmay said when she was done was, "All right."

Her plan almost fell apart at the first step.  She had been climbing
trees since she was old enough to walk, but never when she was quite
so exhausted and hungry.  Ulfmaerr finally had to give her a boost to
get her up to the first branch.

A light breeze blew through the tops of the trees.  Irvings and
beecatchers chirped at each other as they darted through the branches
chasing insects.  The two squirrels who had been watching them kept
pace as they climbed, disappearing momentarily among the branches only
to reappear higher up, their eyes always on the three struggling
humans.

Kulbinder waited until they were almost at the top before launching
himself up the nearest tree in one single burst of speed.  "Showoff,"
Thokmay called out.

Kulbinder froze.  "Quiet," he hissed.

"I was only saying that---"

"Quiet!"  The tiger's tail twitched.  "It's the trolls."

Noxy held her breath.  Something rustled in the distance.  She stared
into the forest, but saw nothing.  "I thought they were supposed to be
scared of the squirrels," she whispered.

"They are," Kulbinder growled softly.  "But there's always some idiot
who---"

Screaming its challenge, the troll crashed through the branches and
threw itself at the spot where Kulbinder had been a heartbeat before.
The tiger was already airborne, twisting to grab another branch with
all four paws.  The troll and the tiger leaped again, chasing and
retreating.

"No, no, no," Ulfmaerr groaned.  "Don't get them angry!"

He was too late.  Noxy shrieked as a squirrel scampered across her
arm.  Another landed on a branch an arm's length from her face and
chittered at her angrily.  More squirrels appeared among the branches,
all the same shade of gray, and all angry.

"Whatever you're going to do, you'd better do it now," Thokmay said
urgently.

"I'm trying!" Noxy closed her eyes and tried to concentrate.  The
stray calf was *there*, three hundred strides east of them, but
it---he---wasn't really a calf any more.  He was a young bull, a
little worried about being so far from his herd, but enjoying the
freedom as well.  No other bulls bumping into him to keep him in his
place, no adults hurrying him along...  He hadn't strayed, he had...
wandered, and he was in no hurry back.

*Come,* she mind-spoke.  *Come. New friends.*

*???* The young bull was so startled that he rained a little before
catching himself.  He had never mind-spoken with a human before, Noxy
realized.  All the clouds she had ever known had been brought down
from the mountains by grownups.  They'd had time to get used to
strange voices in their minds, but not this one.

*Friends,* she mind-spoke as soothingly as she could, biting down to
suppress another shriek as a squirrel ran across her leg.  Its little
claws were just long enough to poke through her thick wool trousers.

"Come on, come on," Thokmay muttered.

"Sh!"  She took a slow breath and let it out.  *New friends,* she
mind-coaxed.  *Come.* In her mind, she heard the steely tone her
*amma* sometimes used when saying, "Please," but actually giving an
order.  *Come,* she repeated, trying to put that same tone into her
thoughts.

She realized instantly that she had made a mistake.  *Won't,* the
cloud mind-spoke stubbornly, his mind shaping images of his mother
pushing him to keep up with the herd when he just wanted to sleep.

"Look out!"  Noxy opened her eyes instinctively at Thokmay's shout
just in time to see the troll that had been chasing Kulbinder fall
flailing through the branches a few strides away.

The tiger landed on a thick branch near her and the prince.  "That
will teach him to try to make a mouse out of *me*," he spat
contemptuously.  "Now, where's our cloud?"

"It won't listen to me," Noxy said helplessly.  "It's never been
ridden before, and I can't---"

A scream of fear and rage cut her off.  Below them, the squirrels had
finally had enough.  First ten, then a hundred, then a great gray
flood of them had thrown themselves onto the troll.  He tore them off
by the handful, but more kept coming.  Their teeth and claws couldn't
get through his fur, not at first, but then the the sheer weight of
them made him stagger, and his fur didn't cover his face or the backs
of his knees or his fingers...

"Pilots preserve us," the prince whispered, horrified.

"Not if we stay here they won't," Ulfmaerr said.  Even as he spoke,
pairs of small eyes were starting to look up into the trees and
branches were rustling around them.

"But I *can't*," Noxy protested.  "He won't listen.  And I shouldn't
even be able to!  People aren't supposed to be able to mind-talk to
clouds unless they're touching them!"

Thokmay put his hand on hers and squeezed it.  "Most people can't
mind-talk to clouds at all," he said quietly.  "But you can.  And you
can do this.  I know you can."  He squeezed her hand again.

Maybe the world didn't really hold its breath at that moment.  Maybe.
But later, looking back, Noxy would always remember that it felt like
it did.  The prince had dirt on his cheek and bags under his eyes and
his coat looking like goofs had been sleeping on it, but all Noxy saw
was his quiet smile.

She nodded, squeezed his hand back, and closed her eyes again.  *Come
now,* she told the cloud bull, not letting a single speck of doubt
into her thoughts.  She wasn't asking.  She wasn't even ordering.  She
was just stating a fact.  He was going to come to them, and he was
going to do it right now.  There wasn't an "or else" because there
didn't need to be.

Nothing happened for a heartbeat, and then she mind-heard a meek, *All
right.* The image that came with it was of a dark gray cloud so big
that it stretched from one horizon to the next.  That was her, Noxy
realized.

*Good.  Hurry.* She lightened the image a couple of shades and
mind-pushed it back to the bull by way of encouragement, then opened
her eyes.

"He's on his way," she told her companions.  Ulfmaerr nodded.  The
tiger rumbled, his eyes on the horde of squirrels gathering below
them.  But the only one Noxy really noticed was the prince, who was
still holding her hand.

She squeezed his and let go.  "So," she said, looking up even though
she knew she wouldn't be able to see the cloud bull yet, because if
she looked at him she'd blush and she was *not* going to blush, "Now
we wait."

"And hope the squirrels don't decide to attack," Ulfmaerr added.  "The
forest is trying to calm them down, but they're not listening."

"Se net harket sterk," a voice from behind Noxy agreed.  It was
Linger, bloodied and battered but with his head still held high.  He
settled onto a branch a couple of strides away, one arm cradled in his
lap.

A squirrel scampered along another branch near his head and chirrupped
at him.  The ancient troll regarded it with his dark, sad eyes and
peeled his lips back from his teeth in something that definitely
wasn't a smile.  The squirrel flicked its tail and disappeared into
the greenery.

Moving slowly, testing his weight at each step, Kulbinder joined him.
"Thank you, most respected," he said.

The troll nodded.  "Wy binne ar banne."

"We are our duty," Ulfmaerr translated.  He chuckled.  "It's something
a magician would say."

"Or my father," Thokmay replied.  "I keep hoping he's wrong, but..."
He shrugged.

Whatever he was going to say next was cut off by Noxy's quiet, "Uh
oh."

"What now?" Thokmay groaned.

"It's Pillow," Noxy said, pointing north through the trees.  "He's
over there somewhere.  But he's coming this way."

Kulbinder growled.  "Have they seen us?"

"How would I know?" Noxy snapped.  "Sorry.  I just---I don't know."
But even as she said it, her thoughts came together like the pieces of
a jigsaw puzzle.

"No," she corrected herself.  "They haven't seen *us*.  But I bet
Grappa Gas saw the bull double back.  Clouds don't do that unless
someone is herding them."

"So who's going to get here first?" Thokmay asked.

"I don't know," Noxy confessed.  Grappa Gas wasn't just one of the
best cloudherds in Stale.  When he was younger, he had raced against
cloudherds from other villages.  The abalone spoons he'd won still
hung in his kitchen.

*Of course, those races were fair,* Noxy thought grimly.  She closed
her eyes once again.  There was the young bull, hurrying toward them.
And there was Pillow, further away but with the wind behind him.

*Stop,* she ordered, careful to send her thoughts only to Pillow.

*No.*  The cloud's reply was swift and angry.

*Stop!* she repeated as forcefully as she could, then gasped at the
image Pillow sent back.  It was Grappa Gas, but with a black eye and a
split lip.

"Oh, grappa," she whispered.  His nose was swollen too.  She wondered
if it had been broken.

She steeled herself.  *Then go slow,* she mind-spoke to Pillow.  *Let
the calf get here first.*

*No.*  And with, Pillow closed his mind to her.

Desperate, she turned her thoughts back to the young bull.  *Faster,*
she urged.  *Go faster.*

Suddenly Linger was up, his teeth bared.  Kulbinder's head snapped to
the side.  "Trouble," he snarled.

"Dragger?" Ulfmaerr asked, gripping his staff.

"No.  This smells human."  Kulbinder's ears flattened against his
head.  "It's soldiers.  They're in the trees."

*Let down by ropes,* Noxy thought.  Her hand flew to her mouth.  "Oh
no.  We have to warn them."

"Warn them?" Kulbinder snarled.  "Warn *them*?"

"The squirrels!" Noxy said.  "We have to warn them about the
squirrels!"

Even as she said it, small gray shapes were scampering up tree trunks,
racing along branches, chittering and squeaking.  One would have been
cute.  Ten would have been spooky.  A thousand was terrifying.

And then one didn't run past them.  Noxy stared at it, willing it to
move on.  Another squirrel stopped beside it.  "Uh oh."  A third, a
fourth---she grabbed Thokmay's arm as angry shouts rang through the
forest.  Another and another and now they were creeping toward her,
freezing whenever she looked straight at them but she was surrounded,
she couldn't look everywhere at once.

The light dimmed.  The young bull had arrived.  *Bunch up!* she
commanded it.  *Come down!*

The cloud hesitated.  *Prickly,* he complained.

*Now!* she mind-shouted, throwing everything she had into it.  "Get
ready!" she told the others.

And there he was, clenched tight like a fist to fit into the gap in
the trees above the sinkhole.  She took one step toward him and
stopped at fresh shouts from the soldiers, pain and fear mixed with
the anger.

"We have to save them!" Thokmay shouted.

"No!" Kulbinder snarled.

"We can't," Ulfmaerr said at the same instant.  "I'm sorry, but---no!
Don't!"

Thokmay plunged into the trees, scrambling from branch to branch in a
clumsy imitation of the trolls' grace, shouting, "To me! To me!"  A
squirrel landed on his head and sank its tiny claws into his scalp.
Another leaped onto his shoulder.

"To me!" he shouted a third time as Kulbinder caught up with him and
batted at his ankles.  The prince stumbled, just barely catching hold
of a branch to steady himself as the tiger knocked squirrels away with
mighty sweeps of his paws.

"The cloud!" Noxy shouted at them.  "Get to the cloud!"  She turned
and sprinted for it herself.  Something crunched underfoot, and then
she threw herself onto the cloud.

Ulfmaerr landed beside her, and Kulbinder and Thokmay a moment later.
The prince tried to get to his feet, slipped, fell, got up again,
and yelled, "Come on!  Come on!"

A lone soldier burst out of the trees, so covered in squirrels that he
looked like a misshapen gray ogre.  He ran toward them and fell
forward just as the cloud began to rise.  Thokmay lunged forward to
grab his hand.

"Help me!" he shouted as the soldier's weight dragged him toward the
edge of the cloud.  Ulfmaerr dove at him just in time to clutch the
leg of his trousers.  Together, they pulled the soldier up onto the
cloud.

They rose into sunlight.  Noxy sat up, then stood and whooped.  They
were airborne!  She was back where she belonged!  *Thank you,* she
mind-spoke to the young bull.  *Thank you.*

*Good?* the cloud asked tentatively.

*Good,* Noxy mind-spoke firmly.  She knelt and stroked his back.  Very
*good.*

"Are you all right?"  She looked up, then took Ulfmaerr's hand and let
him help her to her feet.

"I'm fine," she said.  She had a cloud of her own, she realized.  Rash
and Sensy were going to be so jealous.

"You!" Kulbinder growled as the rescued soldier started to stand.
"Stay down or I'll put you over the side."

"You can try," a familiar voice replied.  The soldier reached up and
pulled off his mask.

It was Sergeant Dorbu.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 20: Choosing Friends

Thokmay's hand reached for the sword that was no longer on his belt.
Sergeant Dorbu shook his head.  "You left it back on the mountain,
remember?  Poor form for a soldier."

"What are you doing here?" the prince demanded.  Beside him, Kulbinder
had tensed, ready to pounce.

"I take it you all know each other?" Ulfmaerr asked pointedly.

The sergeant nodded.  Blood was oozing onto his collar from a squirrel
bite on his neck.  He patted it gingerly with his fingers and examined
the red splotch it left on his fingers.  "I'm Dorbu.  I'm the boy's
secret shepherd."

"What?" Thokmay exclaimed.

"Rot!" Kulbinder exploded at the same time.

"Would somebody mind telling me what a secret shepherd is?" Noxy asked
acidly in the stunned silence that followed.

Dorbu grinned wearily.  "I work for the king's Minister of Rumors.  I
was posted to Panday under cover to keep an eye on what was brewing
there, so when the prince was enlisted and sent there, I was told to
keep an eye on him.  It, uh, it didn't quite work out as planned."  He
shrugged as if to say, what can you do?

"Wait."  Noxy held up a hand.  "You're a *spy*?  For the *king*?"

"The rot you are," Kulbinder snarled.  He took a quick step toward the
sergeant as if preparing to pounce, then checked himself.  "They would
have told me."

Dorbu looked at him sadly.  "I'm sorry," he said.  "I thought they
should too, just in case, but..."  He shrugged again.  "The minister
isn't one to trust people, much less the Gifted."

"I don't believe you," Kulbinder said flatly.  "Most respected, it's
just a trick to distract us.  Look!"

Noxy turned to look where the tiger pointed and gasped.  How could she
have forgotten about Pillow?  She might be older than some of the
trees below them, but she could move when she wanted to, especially
with someone like Grappa Gas herding her.  She was already close
enough that Noxy could see the archers on her back.

And there---further back, up high to hide in front of the sun.  She
shaded her eyes with her hand and squinted.  "Rot," she cursed.  "It's
Tasteless."

"By name and by nature," Dorbu agreed.  "He dropped us in the forest
about half a gallop away."  He stood unsteadily, ignoring Kulbinder's
warning growl, and wiped the blood from his fingers onto his trousers.
"So, are you going to throw me over the side or not?"

He and Kulbinder stared at each other.  "Stop digging your claws into
my cloud!" Noxy told the tiger sharply.  She could mind-hear the
cloud's rising panic.  No one had ever ridden him before, and having
the tiger knead him like an old scrap of carpet wasn't helping
anything.

Kulbinder blinked.  "Stay away from the prince," he rumbled.

"Well, I'm glad that's settled," Ulfmaerr said brightly.  "Now, what's
our plan?"

Noxy squinted at the approaching clouds again.  "Run as fast as we
can," she said bitterly.  "Again."

"We can't run forever," Thokmay said to her quietly.

She nodded but didn't reply.  What was there to say?  Even if Grappa
Gas held back, Tasteless wouldn't, and his cloud was bigger, faster,
and from the mind-sense of things, a lot meaner than the one they were
one.  She would do her best, but it wasn't going to be a long race.

*Go fast.*  It took her a moment to realize the thought wasn't hers,
but the cloud's.

*I know you will,* she mind-spoke back as comfortingly as she could.
*But---*

*Go fast,* the cloud insisted.  *Show you.*

The sudden jolt almost knocked her off her feet.  Thokmay stumbled,
and Sergeant Dorbu fell clumsily onto one knee.  "What in the names of
the saints?"

What had been a gentle breeze a few heartbeats ago was suddenly strong
enough to lift stray strands of hair off Noxy's shoulders.  She held
out a hand flat and tilted it back and forth to test the speed of the
wind.  Her eyes widened.  *How long can you keep this up?* she
mind-asked.

*Go fast all day,* the cloud replied with a mix of confidence and
challenge that would have reminded Noxy's mother of her daughter.

*Go faster?* Noxy asked recklessly.  *Go faster all the way to the
mountains?*

The cloud's answer was another burst of speed.  Noxy whooped.

"What's wrong?" Thokmay asked.

"Nothing!" she said.  She spun to look at the two clouds chasing them.
Pillow was already smaller than he had been, and she could see the
flanks of Tasteless's cloud rippling as he tried to keep up.  She
whooped again and hugged Thokmay before she realized what she was
doing.

"Uh..."  He hugged her back a little awkwardly.  "Thanks?"

She was suddenly aware that everyone was looking at her.  She let go
of him and stepped back, hugging her arms around herself as if cold.
"He's a real peaks runner," she said self-consciously to no one in
particular.  "The cloud, I mean.  Most of the ones we herd graze on
the lower slopes, because it's easier to get to them and they can
carry more water, but he must have been part of a herd from further
east, or maybe west, the mountains are higher in both directions, and
anyway, we don't go up that high because they don't rain as well but
they're a lot faster and..."  She shrugged, suddenly feeling warmer
and unable to meet anyone's eyes---especially Thokmay's.

The young bull hadn't been lying.  Tasteless's cloud began to fall
behind after a few hundred heartbeats, but theirs seemed to have been
born to gallop.  Noxy had to keep reminding him to stay bunched up so
that they wouldn't fall through, but he could mind-hear her
desperation and exhiliration, and it seemed to spur him on.

The forest swept by beneath them like flotsam.  Nameless little rivers
split and split again as they approached the mountains.  Noxy knew she
wasn't the first cloudherd to see them---people took shortcuts over
the Herd of Trees all the time---but there were no fields, no roads,
no twists of smoke rising from chimneys.  This was the deep forest,
and if she closed her eyes and let go even a little, she could feel
its slow attention.

After a while, Ulfmaerr stretched out with his satchel for a pillow
and began to snore.  Sergeant Dorbu lay down as well, though more
cautiously, but Noxy didn't think he slept---not with Kulbinder
sitting on his haunches three strides away watching him.

Thokmay came over to join her near the front of the cloud.  "So what
happens now?" he asked.

Noxy stared at the mountains.  They were getting taller by the hour,
but it would be dark before the cloud reached them.  He needed a name,
she realized suddenly.

"I wonder if this is why my *amma* runs things," she said as Thokmay
opened his mouth to repeat his question.  "I mean, did people just
start asking her, what do we do now, and she didn't want to disappoint
them by saying, how would I know, and---why are you laughing at me?"

"I wasn't laughing," Thokmay protested, a grin still on his face.
"Well, not *at* you.  I just---it's funny.  I mean, not you," he added
hastily as Noxy's brows gathered menacingly.  "I mean this.  I'm
supposed to be king one day.  I can't count how many teachers I've had
trying to get me ready for that.  Law and strategy and fencing and
dancing and---"

"Dancing?  Kings have to know how to dance?"

"Absolutely."  Thokmay nodded solemnly.  "It's a very important part
of diplomacy.  Right up there with dissimulation, which as far as I
can tell means how to tell lies with a straight face when you're so
important that people won't actually say you're lying.  My brother and
I had to practice on each other for hours last summer.  He was a lot
better at it than me."

"You made that up," Noxy accused.

"I'm serious!" Thokmay protested.  "He was gallops better than me."

Noxy rolled her eyes.  "You don't really have classes in lying."

"Absolutely.  Lying and bluffing.  He's better at that, too.  He won't
even bother playing skulls and roses with me any more."

Noxy shook her head.  "You're a little strange, you know that?"

"Says the girl who can talk to clouds that are gallops away," Thokmay
observed pointedly.

Noxy's smile died.  "I didn't ask for that part."

Thokmay nodded again.  "I know what you mean.  I didn't ask to be a
prince.  I wanted to be---"

"---a doctress," Noxy finished for him.  "I remember."

Thokmay shrugged.  "That, or a bookster.  Or maybe a storysmith.
There was one in the market in Panday on Yellowsdays and Bluesdays.
She looked like she was a hundred years old, and if you paid half a
shell she'd put anything you wanted in her story for that day.  I used
to ask for ribbons.  They reminded me of my sister."

Noxy glanced at him.  "You never told me you had a sister."

Thokmay hesitated.  "She's... special.  She's older than me, but she
thinks and talks like a six-year-old.  All sorts of doctresses and
magicians have looked at her, and they say it just happens sometimes."
He shrugged.  "Kind of the opposite of being Gifted like Kulbinder."

"I'm sorry," Noxy said awkwardly.

"It's all right.  She's pretty happy most of the time."  A half-smile
flitted across his face.  "Especially if someone will play dolls with
her."

They flew in silence after that.  The air was cold, but the young bull
was warm, and after a while both Sergeant Dorbu and Thokmay were
snoring along with Ulfmaerr.  Noxy was tired too, but she'd had lots
of practice staying awake on cloudback.  She and Rash and Sensy had
gone down to the cloud pen three nights in a row the summer before.
There, under the watchful eye of Grappa Gas, they had pretended to
stand watch on Big Blue and Pillow for hours at a time.  "You can
close your eyes if you want to," the old man tempted them.  "Just for
a moment."  Rash had, once, and Sensy and Noxy promised to never let
him forget it.  She wondered what they were doing right then.  She
wondered whether her mother was all right, and what had happened to
Aft.  Sergeant Dorbu could probably tell her, but she didn't want to
wake him.  And even if she did, she didn't know if she could trust
anything he said.

*You can slow down now,* Noxy mind-told the cloud absently.  The sun
was starting to set, and the two clouds that were chasing them were
almost lost in the mountain-cast shadows that now stretched across the
forest.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 21: FIXME

*   Bridge what I have to the ending.
*   Foreshadow the lightnings much earlier.
*   Do something with the squirrels earlier or later.
*   The death of Sergeant Dorbu.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 22: Lightning

Noxy and Thokmay walked slowly up the potholed mountain track to the
bridge. The forest smelled cool and moist around them. Juncos and
nutcrackers whistled and chattered in the branches above their heads,
and something the size of a small raccoon rustled through a patch of
thorny misery a few feet away. "Do you like being a prince?" Noxy
asked Thokmay as she picked up a stone.

He thought for a few steps before replying. "I think so. You have to
be a prince before you can be king, and being king like my father is
all I've ever wanted, ever since I was little." He paused again. "But
I guess it's kind of like asking Fluffy if she likes being a cloud, or
Kulbinder if he likes having a tail."

"I guess," echoed Noxy.

"Do you like being able to do magic?"

"What?" said Noxy, startled. "I'm not a magician."

Thokmay smiled.  "You can talk to the clouds in your head, and make
them do what you want. That looks like magic to me."

"I guess I never thought about it," Noxy said. "Everyone I know does
it, so it doesn't seem like something special.  I guess like how
you're going to be a king some day doesn't seem special to you?"

Thokmay stooped to pick up a stone of his own. "Not really.  People
think being a king is about having adventures all the time, but my
father spends most of his time judging law cases, or listening to
Respected Dolkar explain why we can't raise taxes to pay for repairs
to the Apple Bridge.  It's actually about as exciting as watching soup
go cold---until there's a rebellion," he amended.

"So why doesn't he let someone else do it? Can't he just order
Respected whoever-she-is to fix the bridge?"

Thokmay shook his head. "The law says the king has to decide anything
that affects the safety of the kingdom. Or any case of murder in the
capital, or anything involving foreign magicians." He frowned.
"There's another one as well, but I can't remember what it is."

"If I was king, I'd make a new law that said other people could worry
about those things for me," Noxy mused.

The prince sighed. "That's what Princess Shudarga thinks too.  She
says that laws shouldn't belong to people, they should belong to
everyone, like, like the ocean or something, but then what's to stop
everyone from just making their own?"

He stared into the depths of the forest, not really seeing the trees.
"I think---I think laws are different from magic. Magic happens the
way it's supposed to whether you do anything or not, like the sun
coming up or tea going cold if you leave it on the table.  Laws only
work if someone makes them work. If you let one person make a law or
change one just because they want to, it would be like having no laws
at all."  Suddenly he pulled his arm back and threw his stone as high
and as far as he could.  A moment later they heard it go *thock!*
against a tree.

Noxy threw her stone as well. *Thock!*

The prince grinned at her. "Sounded like the same tree."

Noxy grinned back. "I bet it was." She almost reached out to take his
hand as they started walking again.  Almost.

Ulfmaerr was waiting impatiently when they got back. "I was about to
send Kulbinder off after you," he said. "Where have you been?"

"Throwing rocks at trees," said Noxy. Kulbinder turned his head and
stared at the prince, who blushed slightly.

"Well, never mind that," said Ulfmaerr. "Here." He handed them each a
dry brown leaf. "Keep this with you, and don't lose it."

"What's it for?" Noxy asked, turning it over curiously.

"It'll be cold where we're going," Ulfmaerr told them. "This will keep
you warm."

"It's more magic, isn't it?" Noxy said. Ulfmaerr nodded, then
smiled. One of his front teeth was missing.

They let Fluffy pick her own pace as they flew north, rising hour by
hour as the pass snaked between the sharp mountains. The last trees
were far below them, and only an occasional clump of saxifrage or
cutleaf daisy clung to the rocks. The air was so clear that it almost
hurt to breathe.

Finally Ulfmaerr pointed and said, "There. Up over that." Off in the
distance a narrow mountain valley hung above the pass, filled to the
brim by a pristine white glacier. A tumble of snow and broken ice made
a jumbled white fan beneath it.

Fluffy had to circle twice to gain enough altitude to get over the lip
of the glacier. Noxy was so cold that she reached into her pocket to
hold her magic leaf, but Ulfmaerr said, "Not yet. Not until you really
have to."

"I *do* really have to," Noxy chattered, but she pulled her hand out
of her pocket and pulled the prince's cloak tighter around her. She,
Kulbinder, and Thokmay were huddled together to stay warm. Ulfmaerr
didn't seem to notice, even though his toenails were turning blue.

They raced along the glacier. The mountains rose on either side of
them like Marandine's ancient walls. There were no flowers, nothing
green, not even any of the gray-brown lichens the cloudherds called
"belly scrapings". It was like the first day of the world, or the
last, with nothing around but jagged rocks and glaciers glistening
like newly-made gems in the sun.

Suddenly Kulbinder stiffened and hissed, "What is that?"

"What?" asked Thokmay and Noxy together. They struggled to their feet.

"I hear drums." snarled Kulbinder. "Magician! What is this place?"

Ulfmaerr took a deep breath. "They're not drums.  This is the Valley
of Lightnings."

Noxy gasped. "The what?" Thokmay asked.

Ulfmaerr didn't turn his head. "There," he pointed. "And there. See
them?"

Noxy stared at the horizon. "Turn your head a bit," Thokmay told
her. "Try looking out of the corner of your eye. Sergeant Dorbu taught
me." Sure enough, when Noxy looked at one of the peaks, instead of
straight up the valley, she could suddenly see little flashes of light
darting from place to place. A few heartbeats later she heard the
*szzzzzt!* and *crack!* of the lightnings' dance.

Fluffy slowed abruptly beneath them.  *Sharp brights!*

*Friends,* Noxy mind-spoke back, trying to soothe the frightened
cloud.

*Sharp brights __not__ friend,* Fluffy mind-spoke emphatically,
resuming her flight reluctantly.

Then it happened. One moment the lightnings were tiny sparks on the
horizon, and the next they were dazzling and dancing around the
travellers. Up close they were almost invisible, just shimmering wisps
like colored ripples in the air. They crackled like twigs being
broken, over and over.

Noxy and Thokmay cried out with fear. Kulbinder snarled, his ears
pulled back and his hair standing on end. *Friends!* Noxy mind-spoke
at Fluffy frantically. *They won't hurt you!* She had to close her
eyes---she knew she wouldn't be able to convince the cloud as long as
she could see the lightnings herself.

*WHAT WHY HERE WHY YOU COME WHY COME WHY?* The angry words burst into
Noxy's mind like a shout. She gasped, and her eyes snapped
open. Thokmay was staring at her with a frightened look on his
face. He could hear it too, she realized. It was like mind-speech, but
so powerful that it felt like someone else was using her brain to
think with.

At the same instant she realized that her hands and feet had gone
numb. She fumbled at her pocket, but couldn't get the button
undone. Thokmay pushed her hand out of the way and undid it for
her. As soon as her fingers touched the leaf that Ulfmaerr had given
her, the freezing chill eased reluctantly out of her bones.

Ulfmaerr raised his arms. "You know me!" he shouted.  "You know me,
and you remember the bargain I made!"

*WHY WHY HERE WHY COME NOT TIME!* The lightnings flickered red blue
purple blue green blue red.

"I know it's not my time!" Ulfmaerr shouted. "But I need your help
again! Men have come from the plains, evil men. They plan to take the
clouds to war! You must help us stop this thing!"

The lightnings rippled with yellow and green. *MEN TREES WATER CLOUDS
MEN LIGHTNING NOT LIGHTNING.*

"No we aren't, but the law is the law!"  Ulfmaerr sounded
desperate. Noxy suddenly realized that he didn't know if the
lightnings would help them or not.

The thought that came into her mind was almost amused. *MEN LAWS SLOW
DULL NOT LIGHTNING NOT LIGHTNING.*

"But the law!" Ulfmaerr protested. "These people would make weapons of
the clouds!"

*SLOW DULL NOT LIGHTNING CLOUDS NOT LIGHTNING NOT LIGHTNING LAWS,* the
lightnings mind-spoke dismissively.

"If not for the law, then for power!" Ulfmaerr shouted at them. "Look
into me! I will give you anything I am if you will aid us!"

There was a moment of stillness, and deep, biting cold, before the
lightnings replied. *EMPTY NOTHING GIVEN ALL AWAY NOT ENOUGH YOU EMPTY
NOT ENOUGH.* There was a sizzle as the lightnings began to flash away.

*Wait!* Noxy mind-thought desperately. She felt the lightnings'
attention turn to her, and felt their surprise.

*SLOW DULL NOT MAGICIAN DULL SPEAK NOT MAGICIAN SPEAK?*

*Not magician,* she agreed. *Slow and dull. But!* She reached out and
ran her fingers lightly over a puff of cloud, concentrating as hard as
she could on the sensation. *Touch,* she thought.

*!!!* the lightnings mind-spoke back. There was a buzzing, almost like
a conversation in another room, that she could barely mind-hear as
they mind-talked amongst themselves.

*You could have touch,* she mind-spoke again, as persuasively as she
could. "Touch, taste, water running through your fingers, hot porridge
sugar on your tongue, the smell of thimbleberry pie baking... You
could have."

"What are you doing?" Ulfmaerr gasped.

*Chocolate,* Noxy continued. *Kitten fur. Warm under covers. Cold
water on face. Hugs...*

Ulfmaerr grabbed her by the shoulders and shook her.  "What...  are...
you... doing...?" he hissed. "Have you gone mad?"

Noxy pushed him away. "They have to help us! And if you don't have
anything they want, maybe I do!  If I give them my permission, they
can take my body and know what it's like to have touch and smell and
taste. Maybe they'll help us for that."

"Daffodfil, no!" Noxy could see the horror in Ulfmaerr's eyes.  "You
can't!"

"You did," she said simply.  There was no bitterness in her voice,
no anger---not any more.  Her father had done what he had to to keep
her safe, her and everyone else in Stale.  She understood that now,
just as she understood that she had to do the same.

Kulbinder snarled. Ulfmaerr groaned. "Girl, girl, you don't know what
you're doing! The lightnings can survive without bodies, but you
can't! When they get bored and leave you, your body will be as empty
as a boot without a foot in it! And your ghost will wander until the
ice melts!"

"It's the only way," said Noxy stubbornly. Fighting against tears, she
turned to face the lightnings again.  *I wish I'd said goodbye,* she
thought.  Granna Fee, Rash, Sensy, her *amma*...  She spread her arms
and closed her eyes and---

---and fell clumsily onto Fluffy's back as Thokmay knocked her off her
feet.  "Children of the sky!" he shouted.  "You of the thousand and
one colors! Hear me! I am Thokmay Prince Gandan, fourth of that
name. I am a plainsman, but even on the plains, we speak of the beauty
and terrible strength of the blades of light that never grow dull.
Hear me, for I would beg for your aid!"

*SLOW DULL WORDS SLOW DULL BORING,* came back disdainfully.

Thokmay set his jaw. "Yes, slow, and dull, but I have something to
offer that you have never had before. Look inside me! Look in my
heart! If you will help us as the magician has asked, I will give you
something precious." He closed his eyes and took a deep breath. The
look of concentration on his face was so powerful, so painful, that
Noxy could almost hear his thoughts.

There was a pause, just a heartbeat. Noxy felt the lightnings probe,
searching, and then for the first time she mind-heard hesitation from
them. *THRONE POWER MAJESTY NOT SLOW DULL NOT YOURS NOT YOURS TO
GIVE.*

"No, the throne isn't mine," Thokmay agreed. He was no longer
shouting.  He didn't need to---Noxy could feel the lightnings'
attention.  "But the chance that I would be king is.  it is all I have
ever been, and that's what matters, isn't it? That's what makes it
magic?"

"Your Highness, you can't---" Kulbinder started.

"Be still!" the prince snapped. "If people can give up their lives for
me, I can give up my throne for them. What say you?" he shouted
again. "Have we a bargain?"

There was another pause. It stretched until Noxy thought she would
scream. Finally the lightnings spoke. *DONE.  WHAT WHERE WHEN HOW?*

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 23: The End

Fluffy was the only cloud in the sky as they flew toward Stale.
"There!" Kulbinder growled as they came around the final bend.  "Those
are a hawk's wings, or my eyes are older than they should be."

Noxy glanced at the patrolling bird, then back at her home.  The
soldiers on the walls had seen them, of course---a single cloud
swimming against the wind is a hard thing to miss. Half of Princess
Shudarga's soldiers were watching as Fluffy touched down on the
mountain road in front of the fortress gate. Kulbinder dismounted with
a single smooth leap and loped toward the village. The hawk circled
overhead as Fluffy lifted off again. He swooped low to caw at
Kulbinder, but the tiger ignored his taunts.

A dozen soldiers waited for Kulbinder at the old fortress gate, battle
masks in place and swords in hand.  Colonel Bonzon stood in front of
them, unmasked and scowling.

Kulbinder stopped a few strides away. "In the name of Thokmay Prince
Gandan, son of Denpa King Gandan, as his chosen herald, I salute you,"
the tiger said formally.

"And in the name of Shudarga Queen Gandan, I return that greeting, and
swear safe parley," the colonel replied, equally formally. "Your fame
stretches before you like a long shadow, Kulbinder of Thind."

"As your lady's infamy stretches before you," the cat purred. "When
even the ghosts of our ghosts have been laid to rest, still people
will talk of how you sowed war where it should never have grown, but
reaped only your own disaster."

The colonel's face darkened. His men murmured behind him. "Strong
words," he said in a voice as cold as the mountain air.  "Here is
mine.  Surrender the prince to us, and I swear on my name that he will
not be harmed if his father ends his unjust war."

"No!" Kulbinder snarled. "In the name of Denpa King Gandan, and by
right of ancient law, I command you to surrender yourself and your
armies, and to place yourself before the king's justice!"

The sergeant laughed. "Surrender? To a feeble old man, two children,
and a tomcat?"

"No," hissed Kulbinder. "To a great magician, two great hearts, and
death wearing black and yellow fur!" He roared for all he was worth.

Up on the cloud, Thokmay heard the tiger's signal. He stood and
mind-shouted, *Now!* There was a tremendous sun-bright flash as the
lightnings that had been hiding in the terrified cloud's nooks and
crannies burst forth.

Thunder boomed all around Noxy.  The lightnings' dazzle blinded her,
and she smelled burning air.  Then there was an even louder *boom!*
and a rumble that went on and on.

"What's happening? What's happening?" she shouted.

"I don't know," Thokmay shouted back. "I can't see."

"I can't see either," said Noxy. She didn't know who reached for whom,
but she and Thokmay were holding hands.

"That was the south tower," Ulfmaerr said, shouting to be heard above
the battle below them. "The lightnings blasted the roof right off
it. And there! Your wind goose is going to need a new pole."

The dazzle spots started to clear from Noxy's eyes.  Her mouth went
dry as she saw the fires burning in the village below. *Down!* she
frantically mind-shouted at Fluffy. *Down! Down!*

The soldiers scattered in panic as the lightnings played around them.
They had fought men and trolls and the hundred-legged things that
sometimes came crawling out of the Blight, but who could fight this?
In the middle of it all Colonel Bonzon shouted, "Come back here! I
command you!" One of his soldiers, blinded by the light, stumbled into
him as he tried to run.

The colonel shoved him aside and drew his sword.  "You!" he spat at
Kulbinder. "You mangy scrap of fur! I am going to make a carpet out of
you, do you hear me?" He charged at the tiger.

Kulbinder snarled a curse in Thindi and dodged under the first swing,
twisting around as only a cat can to claw at the man's face.  His
claws left deep scratches on the colonel's armor as his weight carried
them both off their feet. The two rolled over and over, Kulbinder
snarling and snapping as Colonel Bonzon tried to get his sword up
to stab him.

Above them Thokmay shouted, "Bring us down! Bring us down! Faster!"
His hands were clenched into fists. "We have to help him!"

"I'm trying!" Noxy said desperately, mind-shouting, *Down! Down!* at
Fluffy.

*Sharp brights,* the young cloud replied, but brought them down
anyway. Thokmay leaped over Fluffy's flank the instant they touched
down. Noxy and Ulfmaerr slithered off behind him.

*Good good good,* Noxy mind-spoke, but the cloud was already rising
and turning to flee.

"Kulbinder! Look out!" Thokmay shouted.  Noxy spun around.  The tiger
and his opponent were rolling toward the edge of the gorge! Thokmay
raced toward them, but he was too late! The last thing Noxy heard as
they rolled over the side was Kulbinder snarl in rage.

Someone grabbed her and spun her around. She started to fight free,
but then her mother's arms went around her in the biggest, fiercest
hug of her life. Noxy froze for a moment, then wrapped her arms around
her mother and squeezed her back.

"Oh, daffodil," Indy wept, her voice breaking. "I was so scared. I was
so scared."

"Me too," said Noxy, her face buried in her mother's shoulder.

Indy straightened up and brushed the tears off her daughter's face. As
she did so Noxy heard Thokmay cry, "Kulbinder!" He was standing at the
edge of the cliff. "Kulbinder, hang on!"

Noxy wriggled free of her mother's hug and ran to join him.  "Down
there!" the prince said, pointing.  "Quickly, get help!" Before Noxy
could stop him, the prince slid over the edge to pick his way down the
steep rock face.

The tiger was wedged between a rock and a manzanita bush. His fur was
wet with blood, but his eyes were bright. "Boy..." he panted.

Thokmay braced his feet against the rock and cradled the tiger's head
in his arms. "I thought I'd lost you too," he said.

The tiger licked his arm with a tongue like a warm piece of
sandpaper. "Don't you know cats always land on their feet?" he
wheezed. He tried to gather his feet beneath him.

"Don't try to move," Thokmay ordered. "They'll be here soon." The
tiger licked his arm again, but didn't speak.

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 24: The Beginning

Noxy woke up in her own bed early the next morning. For a moment she
just lay there, wishing it could all have been a dream, but knowing
that it wasn't. The aches in her muscles from her long, cold ride, and
the smell of burnt homes that lingered in the air, wouldn't let her
pretend.

She slid out from beneath her blankets as quietly as she could, pulled
on her clothes, and tiptoed downstairs, and slipped through the door.
The main square was covered with burned boards that had once been part
of the trading hall's roof.  The scorch marks on the old fortress
walls looked like the brown soot shadows that candles left on
lanterns. A few wisps of smoke still rose from what was left of the
wind goose's pole, and a soldier's helmet lay beside the speaker's
stump, bright with dew.

One of Princess Shudarga's soldiers stood at attention outside the
trading hall. They had surrendered once they knew Colonel Bonzon was
dead. Noxy walked past him as if he didn't exist, though her heart
beat a little faster as she did so. The guard just stood there and
looked straight ahead, thinking about whatever soldiers think about
when they have lost a war.

Granna Fee opened her door when Noxy knocked. "He's upstairs," she
said, hugging her granddaughter. "Don't worry---cats are tough, and
big old cats like him are the toughest. It's the little kittens like
you that we all have to worry about."

"Is Ulfmaerr still here?" Noxy asked, not letting go of her
grandmother.

Granna Fee shook her head.  "He couldn't stay," she said.  "But I
think your new friend is up on the wall somewhere."

"I'm sorry to hear that," the prince said when she found him and told
him that Ulfmaerr was gone.  He was standing on the wall, staring at
the pyre where the casualties from yesterday's fighting had been sent
to their rest. "I wanted to say goodbye."

"Goodbye?" Noxy immediately felt stupid. Of course---he would be
leaving now.

The prince nodded, a bit sadly. "I told the hawk to take word to my
father. We'll give everyone another day, then head down the pass."

"Have you thought about what you're going to tell him?" Noxy asked.

Thokmay shook his head. "The truth, I suppose. Some good men died."

"That's not what I meant."

The prince smiled wryly. "I know. When we were little, my brother
Tsigpa used to say that he ought to be king because he's taller than
me. I guess now he'll get his wish."

"And what will you be instead of a king?" Noxy asked.

Thokmay shrugged again. "I don't know. Being king was..." He trailed
off. "It's like when Ulfmaerr told you that if you let the lightnings
take over your body, it would be empty when they left it. I feel empty
like that."  He cleared his throat.  "What about you?  Have you told
anyone about...?"

Noxy shook her head.  "Not yet."  She looked into the distance where a
single young cloud was grazing on an icy peak.  She could mind-speak
to Fluffy if she wanted to, but he deserved a rest.

"Mm."  The prince nodded, agreeing with everything she hadn't said,
then cleared his throat again. "So... want to go throw some rocks at
some trees?"

Noxy took his hand and gave it a squeeze.  "Sure."  She didn't let go
as they made their way down the stairs, and neither did he.
