---
title: "Controlled Release"
template: page
fiction: true
---

<div align="center">
<p><img src="@root/files/fiction/on-spec-winter-2007.jpg" alt="On Spec Winter 2007" /></p>
<p>First published in <em>On Spec</em>, Winter 2007.</p>
</div>

Maybe you were born that way. Maybe a stray cosmic ray or mutagenic
molecule slapped hands with one of your parents' DNA days or years
before your conception.

Or maybe it was your parents' fault for leaving you on your own when you
were so young. You don't remember being told they were dead. Your
earliest memory is the waiting room at the social services office: the
warm afternoon light, the tear in the blue vinyl seat, the smell of
weariness and despair. You nodded when the woman with the tired eyes
told you about the accident (at least, you think you did), but that's
all.

Or maybe you were still like the others then. Maybe it didn't start
until later, as you went from one foster home to another. Maybe it was
Mr. Larsen's fault. Or Mr. King's. "It's OK," your therapist said, years
later, as he unzipped his pants so that you could "act through" what had
happened. "It wasn't your fault. There was nothing you could have done."

But no–you made that up. You made it up because you didn't want Janie
to leave. Life was so much…warmer…with her in it. She needed to know
why you were so passive, why nothing ever seemed to touch you. She
needed a "why", so you gave her one, and it worked, at least for a
while. She still left in the end–everyone did eventually–but that
was OK. By then, you knew there was something strange on the third
floor.

You were used to lying by the time you met Janie. You don't remember
when it started, any more than you remember your parents. You wondered
about it for a while when you first realized you were different from
other people, then put the question aside. Children always imitated one
another: if one fell down and cried, others would start crying too. You
just took it a little further. Presents never made you happy; the death
of pets never made you sad. Nothing ever made you feel anything, not the
way other people seemed to feel things, but you pretended. You learned
to bounce from foot to foot in line outside the movie theatre as if you
were excited. You learned to snarl back at bullies in gym class,
reciting vaguely-understood threats and obscenities you'd overheard
outside the industrial ed building.

By the time you left for university, you had even figured out how to act
around girls. That was hard; you only understood later that it had been
hard for other boys, too. Indifference didn't work: when you acted
indifferent to other boys' feelings, people called you moody, but when
you acted indifferent to girls, they called you gay, and that meant more
snarling. That meant shoves and punches and having to play chess in your
head to figure out how to just make them all leave you alone. It was so
tedious, so undignified, so you learned to stutter, just a bit, whenever
you had to talk to someone with cleavage. They still made fun of you,
but your pretended weakness drew their malice like poison, and that was
all you cared about.

None of it made sense, not like chess and math made sense. *They* had
rules. *They* made sense. Knights and pawns didn't pretend to move one
way, but actually move another. The bisectors of triangles always met at
a point: *always*. People said you had a gift. They didn't understand.
You didn't love what you were doing. You didn't love anything. You were
just building yourself a nest so that everyone would leave you alone.
Sonya, Melissa, Janie…they were just your way of checking to see if
you were still broken and incomplete.

Because of course you knew you were. You could tell the difference, even
if other people couldn't. You could tell that when other people laughed,
it was because they actually found things funny. You could tell that
when they tickled a child, or had that first sip of red wine after a day
spent painting their apartment, or slipped a hand up under someone's
sweater, that they *felt* something, and you wanted to feel things too.
You tried sports, drugs, sex, religion, and good works. Nothing helped.

Sex did get you the job at NightWorks, though. Math had become geometry
had become computational geometry had become a post-doc in computer
graphics and an even-less-satisfying-than-usual arrangement with your
supervisor, a balding Turk with nicotine-stained fingers. "Their next
game is going to change everything," he confided to you, his feelings no
more sincere than your own. "They could use someone like you. And it
would do you good to get out of academia for a while."

You played it through in your head that night after walking through
early snow to Janie's apartment. You were comfortable in your nest.
People left you alone to tinker with intersecting splines. You could
stay there for the rest of your life, and die without ever really
feeling anything. No. You didn't watch *Star Trek*–you had to have
*some* standards–but you recognized your kinship with Commander Data.
You didn't know what it felt like to feel things, but you wanted to.

So you applied, and interviewed, and took the job just five months
before the first version of *Containment* was released. NightWorks was
calling it "the reinvention of the first-person shooter". At first you
thought it was just marketing hype: there was a semi-coherent back story
about ancient gods on the verge of reawakening, lots of guns, and an
uninspiring soundtrack that mixed the worst of 1920s jazz with speed
metal.

But then you saw the monsters. "What *is* that?" you asked, knowing it
was what they expected. They grinned and slapped you on the back.
"That's your new job," they said. "They're non-polygonal, and we have to
render them twenty times faster than we can right now or kiss our
bonuses goodbye."

"Non-polygonal" was the most anodyne description possible.
They…*shifted*, somehow, even in the stills from the art department on
the third floor. You felt a twinge in your stomach. Was the yogurt you'd
had for breakfast? No–it was *fear*. You felt *afraid*.

You and Janie had sex that night for the first time in months. She got
angry when she realized you'd been watching the stills from the art
department cycle randomly on your screen as she did the things she
thought you liked. She shouted a bit, then cried, then left. You lay on
the couch all night, wondering if the pictures would get you excited
again. They didn't. You needed more.

The next day, you asked to meet the artist. "It's, uh, we got them from
the guys on the third floor," you were told. "They're kind of in the
middle of a lot of stuff. Just figure out how to animate them, OK?"

Your first attempts took two months of round-the-clock work, and were
still pathetic. Morphing from one still to another produced green
glowing blurs that RDST and sub-pixel sampling couldn't cure.
Polygonization got you nowhere: the best least-squares code you could
find couldn't fit a mesh to what was on your screen.

In desperation, you turned to the web. "The poor man's library, the
homeless man's librarian," the Turk had sneered, but this time it did
the trick. A search for splines on two-dimensional projections of
non-Euclidean surfaces found an OCR of a paper from the 1950s. Buried in
the references was a mention of work done before the war at Miskatonic
University. The description was too vague for you to be sure, but you
had run out of leads. If *Containment* wasn't on the floor at E3 in two
months, you'd have to find a new job.

You rented a car and drove north through towns the post-industrial
renaissance hadn't reached. You expected Arkham to look the same;
instead, its streets were brightly lit, and its houses freshly painted.
New money, and lots of it: every third vehicle was a late-model SUV, and
every second face had the focused look you had only ever seen on
recruiters for three-letter government agencies.

The university librarian seemed relieved when you explained what you
were looking for. "Not the special collection?" he asked. "You're sure?"
No, you assured him, wondering briefly what made the special collection
so special. All you wanted was Volume 31 of the *Upper New England
Transactions on Pure Mathematics*.

Nothing smells like old ink. Nothing sounds like old leather and binding
glue bending for the first time in decades. No, you told the hovering
librarian, you wouldn't need to lay it flat for photocopying. You showed
him the zoom lens on your cell phone camera, assured him it didn't use a
flash ("Ultraviolet can be *so* damaging to these old dears"), then
photographed the article's twelve dense pages.

You almost went off the road on the way home when you realized you were
humming along with the radio. A quick study of the grainy images in
Figures 2 and 5 had been enough to tell you that it was what you had
been searching for. They had made your stomach squirm. They had made you
*feel*.

It took you three days to understand the paper. The author had been a
Hungarian, and his English bent at angles almost as strange as those he
used in his splines. You searched for him online; all you found was a
potted biography that said he had fled Europe in middle age. A refugee
from the rising tide of speeches and uniforms and camps and fires, you
thought, but no, the timing was wrong: the paper had been published in 1931.
You wondered briefly what he might have been fleeing, then put the
thought aside. Later, you would be able to guess.

Three days to understand it. A thirty-hour sprint to turn it into code.
Six hours of troubled sleep that ended when the guy from the next
cubicle shook you awake. "You OK?" he asked with more suspicion than
care in his voice. As bleary as you were, you understood what he meant.
Two of the sound effects team had been let go the month before. The head
of HR had given everyone a stern lecture about controlled substances and
personal responsibility, which had made no sense: Qixiang, sure, but
David? David was allergic to everything. He *had* started muttering
under his breath, and drawing five-pointed stars decorated with what
looked like Arabic, or maybe Tolkien's Elvish, on every flat surface in
his cubicle, but that wasn't far enough from the mean for programmers to
merit firing.

The guy from the next cubicle was still watching you. "Just a
nightmare," you told him. "But hey, check this out." You turned your
keyboard right side up and typed a few commands. The image on your
screen *flowed* through a texture-mapped corridor.

"Jesus shit." He laughed nervously. "That's pretty gross. But hey, it's
not clipping right. See?"

You are momentarily irritated. The best thing about working with
programmers is that they don't find your lack of social skills odd. The
worst thing is their lack of those same skills. Still, he's right: the
thing you have created on the screen isn't clipping properly when it
turns corners. The thought brings its solution with it. You drain the
last warm Coke from the can you discarded as empty last night and start
typing.

*Containment* is the hit of E3. *The* hit, the only thing anyone talks
about. The pre-release reviews brush past the storyline and game
mechanics; what they all rave about is the graphics. Your graphics. Your
"thing".

There are congratulations. There are pats on the back. There are
bonuses, and smiles from people in suits, and a million other
*irrelevancies*. There is even an email from Melissa, whom you haven't
spoken to in five years. You read the first three lines and delete it.
She doesn't matter. The games you let her play with your body in the
hopes that you would feel something don't matter. The increasingly
unearthly shapes you are coaxing out of the computer are all that
matter.

And then the hammer falls. Your team lead takes you aside. "We decided
to ratchet down the quality a little," she says. "So that mid-range
cards could handle the load." She shows you what it looks like with
thirty-five hundred irrational NURBS per frame instead of the twenty
thousand you have been using.

It isn't right. You feel nothing when you look at the images. You
protest, heatedly, and even use some of the language you remember from
those confrontations outside the industrial ed building, but she shakes
her head. "This has come straight from the third floor," she says.

You demand to speak to them. She hesitates. "Actually, they want to
speak to you."

The elevators don't go to the third floor. You have to get off at the
fourth, walk past security, through a double-locked door, and down a
flight of stairs. There's another security guard there, who checks your
card against your face very, very carefully. "Safeguarding our core
intellectual property," they say, but you can tell they're lying.

One side of the third floor looks like any other cube farm. The other is
a blank wall with a single heavy door guarded by another security guard.
The door frame is covered with the same Arabic/Elvish writing they were
so careful to clean off David's whiteboard after he left.

The man who greets you is in his fifties. There are bags under his eyes,
but the eyes themselves are bright, alert, probing. "I've been looking
forward to meeting you," he says warmly. "Can I get you anything?
Coffee?"

You sit together in a side office with two others, a man and a woman,
both with that three-letter agency look on their faces. They compliment
you on how realistic your images were. You thank them, remembering to be
modest. The woman shakes her head. "No, really," she says. "Let me show
you."

She picks up a remote and turns on a large LCD screen embedded in one
wall. It's *Blair Witch* jumpy: a gray sky, trees just starting to bud,
a ramshackle old barn… And then something moves. Something *shifts* in
directions that aren't supposed to exist and flees deeper into the
woods.

"Jesus shit," you say, reaching for the first words you can think of.
"What the hell was that?" But you recognized it. How could you not,
after staring at still frames from that video for two months?

They give you forms. You sign without reading them. They explain that
their agency operates outside normal legal constraints. Any compromise
will result in dire consequences. You nod. You don't show your
impatience. They will tell you what you want to know.

After years of lying to people, you have become very good at spotting
liars. These three are telling the truth. The ancient gods, with their
unpronounceable names, exist. Or rather, "exist", in some sense that
minds confined to four dimensions will never be able to understand. They
are malevolent, if only in the way that human beings are malevolent
toward protozoans.

And they have been contained. Measurement; propositional logic; right
angles; religions hollowed out until they no longer demand blood, or
even really belief; certain practices persecuted, then ridiculed, until
it's impossible for all but fanatics and the extremely unlucky to
separate fact from fiction.

"It probably started by accident," says the man with the tired eyes. He
is famous among programmers for the clarity of his architectures, for
his ability to make code do things no one else can. As he speaks, he
rubs a blemish on the back of his left hand shaped like the imprint of
something with five rounded points, and you wonder about the rumors of
tragedy in his counter-culture youth. "The Egyptians invented
mathematics to measure their fields. The Greeks invented logic so that
they could win political arguments. The Hittites invented iron so they
could conquer the world. They didn't realize it would drive the darkness
back."

"The darkness?" you ask.

He nods, glancing at the three-letter pair for permission to continue.
"Magic. Irrationality. Call it what you want–every time someone
understood why A squared plus B squared has to equal C squared, another
little bit of the world became ours instead of theirs."

He tries explaining it in evolutionary terms. Rationality was
self-reinforcing. Confucian law, the rigorous poetics of Classical
India… Each drove magic back a step. Each created a little more space
in which rationality was the only thing that worked.

Until one day, the patches of light joined up, leaving the darkness
confined to isolated pockets. That was when things started to go wrong.
Compress a gas, and its temperature goes up. Compress the darkness, and–

He stops and swallows, unable to go on. The female agent (in your
mind, she is definitely an "agent", even if you don't know of what)
finishes the sentence for him. "And it goes critical." The camps in
Europe.  Cambodia's killing fields. Rwanda. Abba. The Navajo
insurrection–don't ask, it has been wiped from the history books, it
never happened.

Squeezing the darkness ever harder could only lead to total criticality.
Even the agent lowers her voice for that phrase.

So a plan had been formulated. "Science fiction," the male agent says.
"Horror movies. *Alien*. Buffy the fucking Vampire Slayer. Astrology
columns in the daily papers. Intelligent design." He snorts.

The man with the tired eyes shrugs apologetically. The thing is, he
explains, it seemed to be working, so those in charge of such things–the
ones in the shadows, the ones who worked for organizations that never,
*never*, officially existed–had decided to up the stakes.

"The game," you say. They nod, pleased that you have figured it out. No
more hints or surrogates: this time, they would let people see the real
thing.

Or at least, something close to it. "Your stuff was just a little too
realistic," the woman says.

It is your turn to nod. "I can fix it," you tell them. "There's better
ways than just cutting the NURBS count." You make up details on the
spot. It is plausible enough to convince them. They offer you access to
archive footage from containment areas, to digital copies of manuscripts
written by mad Arabs, corrupt monks, and yes, Hungarian mathematicians
who had taken refuge in backwater New England universities in the wake
of local containment failures.

They shake your hand, tell you how grateful they are that you have
agreed to help. You say what they expect you to, but your mind is
already on the problem. You nod to the security guard who holds the
fourth floor door open for you, nod again to the people you pass on the
way back to your cubicle, noting the curiosity and respect on their
faces. You are from the third floor now. You can use that.

You take a bagel from the tray outside the coffee room, lathered in
cream cheese, grab a double espresso, and sit down in your cube. You
close your eyes and replay the footage in your mind. There it is in your
gut: that *feeling* again. Fear, revulsion–it doesn't matter what it
is. For the first time, you *feel* something, and you want more.

You smile to yourself. "Controlled" release? You chuckle quietly,
oblivious to the sound's manic undertone, and start to type.
