---
title: "Frank in Queue"
template: page
fiction: true
---

The tiles on the floor were white and bright.  Frank shifted his
weight to his right leg, then lifted his heels a millimeter to stretch
the muscles in his calves.  "It's not fair," he thought angrily.  "How
could there be so many people so early in the day?"

Frank's canister loading machine had broken down just after lunch.
The engineer (stubby and balding, probably a drinker, Frank had
decided) had looked at it and shaken his head.  "Be Monday at least
'fore I kin get parts," he had announced.  "Y' might 's well take th'
weekend."  Frank had almost lost his temper, but suddenly the idea,
the idea of getting into the queue early, had hit him like one of his
migraines, but in reverse.  He'd even thanked the engineer.

But when he got to the waiting room there were already twenty people
standing in a patient line like some brainless dinosaur slowly being
devoured by a doorway in the wall.  Frank had taken his place at the
rear of the queue in dismay.  After a few minutes, though, he managed
to cheer himself up by thinking that it was still early, there would
be plenty of time.  Usually, he couldn't get to the office until it
was almost time to close.  Usually, he was still two dozen places away
from the head of the queue when the office shut.

The door opened again.  The slump-shouldered grey-haired man who'd
gone in five minutes previously came out.  His chin hung down over the
knot in his tie, and he moved liked a sleep-walker.  "Didn't get one,"
Frank thought smugly.  "Better and better, better and better."  (Frank
had a theory which said that the more people ahead of him who looked
happy, the less chance he had.  He felt that way about life in
general.)  A plump, bleached woman whose lipstick looked like an open
wound went in and closed the door behind her.

The queue moved slowly.  Some people came out bright-eyed.  Some came
out like the dead not sure they wanted to rise.  And Frank's
excitement grew and grew.  He could even feel himself becoming
slightly *aroused* as he neared the head of the queue.

Just one more person in front of him, a skinny girl with her hair in a
complicated knot.  Frank felt like speaking to her, like wishing her
luck, but he remembered where he was and looked at the blank white
walls instead.  He could let his eyes slide sideways and count the
number of people behind him when he did that, which made him feel even
better.  When the door opened the girl pushed past the man leaving the
office before he had a chance to close the door properly.  "Tsk, tsk,"
Frank clucked.  "Manners matter.  They certainly won't let *her*
leave."

Five minutes of agony.  The girl came out looking exhausted.  Frank
straightened his skinny shoulders and stepped through the door,
carefully closing it behind him with what he hoped was a self-assued
*click*.

The office was the same as it had been last week, just like that week
had been the same as the week before it, and that week the week
before.  A plush green carpet, two tasteful prints in muted shades of
brown and grey, a potted fern…  The desk was old oak, or perhaps
mahogany.  Frank admitted to himself that he didn't know a lot about
wood.  He stood waiting until the warm voice said, "Please, sit down."
Frank sat.  "Now, what can we do for you today?"

"I, ahem, I'd like to buy a ticket, please.  One way."  Frank shifted
in the seat and wished his underwear wouldn't get so sticky when he
was nervous.

"Yes, a ticket.  Where to?"

"Umh, to Earth, please."

"Yes, to Earth."  The voice paused.  "You've have been saving for this
for a long time."

It didn't *sound* like an accusation, but Frank gulped.  "I, er, yes,
I have.  Quite some time."

"Yes, quite some time.  Just a moment."  The voice fell silent.  Frank
shifted in the chair, then reminded himself furiously that composure
was important.  He sat perfectly still for thirty seconds, then forgot
and started fidgeting again.

"You are in luck," the voice said, "There seem to be some tickets on
the next flight.  Did you want smoking or non-smoking?"

"Oh, er, non-smoking, please."  Frank swallowed drily.

"Oh.  Oh dear.  I'm afraid we have no non-smoking tickets available.
Perhaps you could try again next week?"

"I, yes, next week.  Thank you," Frank said miserably.  He stood and
brushed at his trousers, then abruptly strode to the door and pulled
it open.

"It's not fair!" he thought angrily.  "It's just not fair."  He had
reached the revolving door that led from the waiting room back into
the mining complex's main tunnel.  When he told them where he wanted
to go they didn't have flights leaving.  When he told them first class
they said he couldn't afford it; when he told them second class they
said that they didn't have second class.  It wasn't—

The day's second thought struck him like a cave-in.  He pulled his
shirt sleeve back and looked at his watch, then looked at the queue.
He counted the people in it one by one, nodding his head once for each
person.  Thirty-one.  Why, there were usually at least forty when he
arrived if he worked a full day, and he sometimes got in even then.
He bit his lip.  Nobody had ever actually said that you could only ask
once a week.  He looked at his watch again as though it would tell him
what to do, then nodded decisively and went and joined the end of the
queue.

It was torture.  It was like a particularly long Enthusiasm Rally.
(Frank didn't enjoy the colony's monthly Enthusiasm Rallies.  Somehow,
all those voices were so much louder than the mining machines.  He
understood the sounds the mining machines made.)  Frank wanted to
scream at the people ahead of him to hurry up.  All he had to do was
ask for smoking this time.  "Smoking," he repeated over and over to
himself, "Smoking, smoking, smoking."  One young man spent eleven
minutes in the office, according to Frank's watch.  It was all he
could do not to rush up to the head of the queue and pull the door
open and drag the man out bodily.  Instead, he bunched his fingers
into balls and relaxed them, one hundred times for each hand, then
started chewing his nails down past their usual stubs.

Three people.  One middle-aged man with glasses and a straggly
moustache, wearing a white shirt with damp circles under the armpits.
One fat teenage girl, chewing gum (or something worse, Frank thought
darkly), occasionally brushing at the spots of acne beneath the makeup
on her cheeks.  And one woman about Frank's age, well-dressed,
carrying a briefcase, glancing around the girl in front of her at the
door every few seconds.  Frank's teeth went *clip* *clip* *clip*.

Two people.  The fat girl had decided to take off her earrings, but
one of them had caught in her cardigan.  She muttered to herself as
she tried to disentangle it.  The businesswoman (or administrator,
Frank thought, someone important anyway) heaved an exasperated sigh.
The girl turned and glared, then faced the door again and stubbornly
manipulated her earlobe.

One person.  The fat girl hadn't managed to get her earring undone.
She's probably wasting time trying to get it straightened out, Frank
thought.  Stupid cow.  It isn't fair.

And then the door opened and the fat girl came out, one earring on,
the other off, tears streaking her makeup.  Frank smiled at her
savagely, but she didn't notice, or perhaps she just didn't recognize
the savagery.  The businesswoman hurried in and closed the door.
Frank looked at his watch.  There might just be time.  There might
just be—

The bell went.  "Good afternoon, citizens.  As it is now closing time,
would those persons still waiting please be so kind as to return next
week?  Thank you."  The people behind Frank cursed, or sighed, or even
laughed good-naturedly if they were far enough back.  He heard heels
clicking on tiles as they started to walk back toward the exit.

All I had to say was 'smoking', Frank thought.  It's not fair.  All I
had to say was 'smoking'.  It's NOT FAIR!

"It's not fair!" Frank shouted.  "It's not fair!"  He grabbed the door
handle and pulled the door open with a single wrench.

"Please, Richard, oh Richard, pleeeease…"  Frank stared in horror
at the businesswoman lying naked on a hard tiled floor with her eyes
closed and her hands—Frank felt sick.  The carpet was gone, the
desk was gone.  The only thing left in the room was a squat, ugly
machine connected to the wall by heavy gray power cables.  Somewhere
an alarm was ringing.

"What are you doing?" Frank shouted.  The woman opened her eyes
suddenly and shrieked.

"Who are you?  Richard!  Oh my god, where's Richard?  Where am I?"
She struggled to her feet and then suddenly realized she was naked.
"Oh my god," she whimpered wretchedly.

"What are you doing?"  Frank shouted again.  He grabbed her by the
shoulders and started shaking her.  "What have you done to the ticket
office?  What have you done?"  Strong arms wrapped in the
authoritarian khaki of the Recreation Police gripped him and pulled
him away.  A man's voice apologized to the woman, telling her they
were very sorry she had been interrupted, of *course* nobody would
know, her fantasies were her own affair, yes of course they wouldn't
tell anyone, that would be unethical (the voices were louder and
louder), yes of course, he must have snapped, it was happening to so
many these days…  The last thing Frank felt was the needle going in.
