---
title: "Plans for 2016"
date: 2015-12-28 01:00:00
year: 2015
original: swc
---
<p>
  Twelve months is a long time.
  A year ago
  I was wrapping up my second month without an income
  and had serious doubts about whether Software Carpentry was going to be viable.
  Today,
  our new Executive Director
  and Program Coordinator
  are in place,
  our workshop administration tool is ticking over nicely,
  we're about to elect our second Steering Committee,
  we've published our lessons,
  we have a growing number of partners and affiliates,
  our reboot of instructor training
  has taught us a lot,
  and those are just the things I've bookmarked.
</p>
<p>
  But it's been a difficult
  year
  for me personally,
  one that has prompted considerable
  reflection.
  Based on that and discussions with people in the two Carpentries,
  I'm going to work on instructor training full-time for the whole of 2016.
  The notes need to be polished,
  the checkout procedure
  needs to become routine,
  I need to train more people to run the course on their own,
  and there's plenty of other things to keep me busy.
  And who knows?
  I may finally finish one of the
  books
  for
  children
  that I've been working on.
</p>
<p>
  So to close out my last post of 2015,
  I'd like to say how grateful I am to everyone
  who has given Software Carpentry their time and energy this year.
  It has been a privilege to work with you,
  and I look forward to helping you help even more people in 2016.
</p>
