---
title: "The Princess and the Bear"
template: page
fiction: true
---

## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, it measures eight thousand
gallops from bow to stern and six thousand from port to starboard.  Its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by an ocean whose outer shore rises up to
hold the world as a child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Chernese history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as well.
Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a long war that scarred the moon,
turned Lake Karaband into a sea of glass, and littered the land with strange
magic.  When the war was over the Pilots were gone, leaving humanity and the
Gifted to carry on as best they could.*

*Now look there, where the Brumoso Mountains tumble down toward the ocean and
ninety little kingdoms squabble endlessly with their neighbors.  A small herd of
panicked clouds is fleeing west over orchards and fields.  On the back of one of
those clouds is a young woman.  She had high hopes for the day, but now all she
wants to do is survive.*

## An Unexpected Meeting

The tornado roared, tearing at the trees beneath it like an angry child pulling
up handfuls of grass.  *Left! Left!* Noxy mind-shouted, squelching her own panic
so that the young cloud beneath her wouldn't sense it and panic in turn.

Cloak hesitated. *Left!* Noxy ordered as forcefully as she could.

As the cloud began to turn, Noxy heard a mighty *crack!* She hoped it was just
an apple tree being snapped in two---she had seen farmers' cottages nestled
among the orchards below before the tornado appeared.  She had seen people too,
pointing and waving at the clouds overhead and then running for cover when the
tornado attacked out of a clear blue sky.

Noxy wiped wind-blown grit from her eyes, but more immediately blew into her
face. She could barely see Rind and the others in front of her. *Faster!* she
urged.

Cloak struggled to obey.  They had been flying since before dawn, and she could
mind-hear him tiring.  *Please,* she mind-spoke.  *I know you can do it.*

Without warning a branch as thick as Noxy's leg tore through the cloud and
clubbed her shoulder. She was airborne for one sickening moment before falling
back onto Cloak.  She dug one hand into the cloud and held on as tightly as she
could.  *Down!  Down!  Down!* she mind-shouted, not realizing that she was
screaming the words as well.

The injured cloud plummeted toward the ground. Noxy glanced back, afraid the
tornado would follow, but it had stopped above a pile of wreckage that had been
a barn moments before to tear the boards apart and whirl them around. Noxy cried
out at the sight of people tumbling through the air, but it was just laundry on
a clothesline.

Cloak scraped his belly against the trees, then sagged to the ground with a
mind-spoken mewl of pain. Noxy slid down his side, gasping as she jostled her
bruised arm. The branch had torn open the sleeve of her gray leather coat and
the heavy quilted shirt she wore underneath it, but had only scraped her
skin. Her knees went weak as she realized how close a call she'd had.

She and Cloak had come down on a narrow dirt track through a patch of forest
that lay between two apple orchards.  The summer-green branches of the oaks and
maples around them still shook in the wind, but she and Cloak were safe, at
least for now.  She took a shaky breath.  Rind and the other cloudherds would
have seen her land.  They would come and find her once the tornado was gone.
There was nothing she could do but wait while the tornado turned the farm into
kindling and then went in search of something new to destroy.

Hooves drummed on the road behind her. Half a dozen soldiers in yellow jackets
galloped toward her on stocky ponies. She struggled to her feet with a grimace.

The lead rider reined in a few paces away. "Are you all right?" he asked,
raising the black-and-yellow battle mask that covered his face.

"We're fine," Noxy said, cradling her bruised arm. "Did you see the others?"

"They went along by west," the soldier said, pointing.  "Looks like they all got
by clear."

A second rider shouldered his horse past the first.  "Noxy?" he asked
incredulously, his voice breaking. "Is that you?"

Noxy stared at the newcomer.  How did he know her name?

The second rider raised his battle mask to reveal a young man with four parallel
scars glistening slightly against the dark skin of his left cheek.  "Noxy---what
are you doing here?"

"Thokmay?"  Noxy stared at the prince of Gandan, cloud and arm both momentarily
forgotten.  She struggled to her feet.  "How---" Before she could finish her
sentence the world started to spin.  She sagged back against her cloud.

"Noxy!" The prince leaped down from his horse. He paid no attention to Cloak
edging away nervously as he helped her sit back down on the hard-packed dirt
track.

"I'm all right," Noxy protested, trying weakly to shake him off. "It's Cloak
that's been hurt." She tried to struggle back to her feet, but the prince put a
hand on her shoulder to stop her.

"Just sit a moment," he said firmly. "Jinpa!"

"*Sra*?" one of the soldiers answered.

"That farm we passed," the prince said, pointing back along the track. "See if
you can get help."

"Yes *sra*!"  The soldier snapped his horse's reins, only to pull up sharply
when Noxy said, "Wait!"

This time the prince didn't stop her from getting up. "The farm's gone," she
said. "The tornado tore it to pieces. I saw people running..."

The prince's jaw tightened. "Manpa!" he barked, his voice breaking again.
"You're with Jinpa. See if there are any survivors. Help them if you can. Double
time!" The two soldiers saluted and galloped away.

The prince looked back at Noxy. "Well," he said in a bemused voice.  "It's good
to see you, but what are you doing *here*?  It's a long way from Stale."

Noxy shrugged, then winced. This wasn't how she had imagined meeting the prince
again, not at all. "We were on our way to Chaghan.  Rind got a contract for some
rain there---she's the mayor now---and Apple Bridge was sort of on the way,
and..."  She shrugged again to hide her embarrassment.  She had wanted to
surprise him...

Before the prince could reply, one of soldiers called out, "*Sra*---above us!"
The other clouds had returned.

Rind brought her cloud down onto the road two dozen strides from Cloak and slid
off while her mount was still settling. Like Noxy, she wore her frizzy black
hair in long braids, but her leather coat was fringed with red and orange twists
of ribbon.  Her dark face was as narrow and as fierce as a mountain hawk's.

She strode over to Cloak without as much as glancing at Noxy, the prince, or the
soldiers and laid her hands on its flank.  "Sh, sh, sh," she said soothingly as
she closed her eyes to mind-speak with the injured cloud.

Thokmay caught Noxy's eye and raised his eyebrows.  Noxy shook her head
slightly---she still hadn't told anyone her secret.  The prince nodded almost
imperceptibly.

Rind gave Cloak one last reassuring pat.  "He could have been torn to shreds,"
she said flatly, rounding on Noxy. "And *you* could have been killed.  I'd never
have heard the end of *that*."

"Yes, *sra*," Noxy said, eyes downcast.

Rind glanced at Prince Thokmay and did a double take. "Oh hells," she said
blankly.  "What are you doing here?"

"That does seem to be the question of the day," the prince said mildly, his
voice cracking.  As Rind opened her mouth to reply, he continued, "We were on
our way to escort the new consul from Chaghan into Apple Bridge when we spotted
the tornado.  I expect he'll have gone on ahead---we should get moving too in
case the tornado comes back."

Rind's eyes narrowed. "Comes back?"  She hesitated before grudgingly adding,
"Your Highness."

The prince nodded. "It's not just some monster out of the Blight. It's been
hitting homes and farms for three weeks now, all people who've been helping us
track down contrabanders."

"You think someone summoned a tornado?" Rind said incredulously.

The prince shook his head. "No.  That tornado probably spent the last thousand
years in a bottle at the bottom of Fast Lake.  Some contrabander must have
dredged it up or found it floating in the river.  It's just our bad luck
that---"

"Your Highness!" The soldiers who had gone down the road had come trotting
back. Two frightened boys in hand-me-down clothes were sitting behind Jinpa,
while an old woman rode behind Manpa.

The two boys stared wide-eyed at the pair of grounded clouds while their
grandmother told her story.  The farm, it was her son-by-marriage's, she'd moved
in after the children were born, and they'd been out pruning, her daughter and
her husband that is, not the boys, and they'd seen some men in the forest with a
cart, and, well, everyone knew some people had a little business now and again
that other folk shouldn't pry into, but these weren't anyone her son-by-marriage
recognized, and they'd talked about it and decided they ought to tell someone,
and they needed some new clothes for the boys, they were growing so fast, so
they'd gone into town that morning, and then that thing came out of nowhere, and
the boys had been so brave, but what was she going to tell her daughter and her
son-by-marriage about the house?  The roof was gone, and the chicken coop, and
the whole *barn*, and---

"His Majesty will pay to have it all rebuilt," the prince told her soothingly.
"But right now, my men will see you safely into Apple Bridge. You can stay there
as long as you need to."

The old woman nodded, fighting tears.  The prince turned back to Rind. "You
would be welcome in Apple Bridge as well, of course."

"Out of the question," Rind said sharply. "We've already lost half a day, and if
the tornado comes back---"

"But Cloak is hurt," Noxy interrupted, "He'll never make it to Chaghan if he
doesn't get some time to heal."

"We don't *have* time," Rind snapped.  "We have a contract, and we're already
going to be late."

"Then I'll stay here with Cloak until he's better," Noxy declared.

"Out of the question," Rind repeated, crossing her arms. "I'm not leaving one of
my riders in the middle of nowhere."

"I'm old enough to take care of myself!" Noxy said indignantly.

"Just like you took care of Cloak?" Rind shot back.

The prince cleared his throat.  "I will take responsibility for her," he said.
"She can stay at the garrison house and her cloud can use the courtyard until
they're able to catch up with you."

Rind threw up her hands. "Like mother, like daughter.  Just promise me you won't
go looking for trouble."

"I never go *looking* for trouble," Noxy muttered, but Rind was already
scrambling back onto her cloud. A few moments later she was airborne, heading
west with the rest of the herd.

The prince's carefully polite expression turned wistful as he watched the clouds
fly away. "Can your cloud make it to Apple Bridge?" he asked Noxy.

She put her hand on Cloak's flank and mind-spoke with him before nodding.  "Yes,
if we go slowly. I've been pushing him pretty hard to keep up with the others,"
she added, feeling a sudden pang of guilt. "I think that's why we couldn't get
away from the tornado like they did."

The prince handed his horse's reins to Jinpa. "Put the lady and her young men on
Bucketbreath here," he ordered. "See them safely back to town, and tell the
staff that they're to be given rooms in the garrison guest house if they can't
find something more suitable.  I will take the cloud back with Noxious."

The soldier cleared his throat. "Um, *sra*, are you sure---"

"We'll all be safer if someone is in a position to spot the tornado returning,"
the prince said crisply.

"Yes *sra*," Jinpa replied doggedly, "But---well, Sergeant Gyalpa said to be
double sure you were back along the garrison in time for the dinner tonight.
With the new consul, *sra*.  What with protocol and all along by that."

The prince muttered something about protocol under his breath.  "The cloud won't
be any slower than horseback," he continued in a normal voice.  "And if I'm
late, I'll tell the good sergeant it was my fault."

"Yes *sra*," Jinpa said glumly.  He exchanged a look with Manpa that said it
wouldn't matter to the sergeant whose fault the prince said it was.

Prince Thokmay pointed at the two little boys.  "You two keep an eye out as
well," he said sternly. "If you see any sign of trouble, you tell these men
right away, all right?"

"Yes *sra*," the older one said. His brother just stared wide-eyed at the the
prince, the cloud, and the big wide world he'd suddenly found himself in.

It took Noxy two tries to get back onto Cloak.  Wisely, the prince didn't try to
help.  Once she was settled, he pulled himself up onto the cloud behind her and
sat quietly as they lifted into the air.

They levelled off a hundred strides above the trees and turned toward Apple
Bridge.  The soft, slightly damp feel of the cloud brought memories flooding
back to the prince. The last time he had flown had been two years ago. A lot had
changed since then, but not the thrill of being able to see the whole world at
once: the apple orchards, the hackthorn bushes in their summer finery, a trio of
deer by a stream, a farmer shading his eyes to look up as they passed...

And there, in the distance, the Blight.  Centuries ago, the Pilots had dumped
their magical waste there, from spells gone wrong to enchanted creatures so
dangerous that even the Pilots were afraid of them.  At its center lay Fast
Lake, where a year might pass for every day in the normal world.  Around it, the
land was---strange.  Some parts were completely barren, while others were
crowded with pencil trees whose limbs swayed in time to music no human being had
ever heard.  Chaghan lay on the far side, three days' hard ride for anyone brave
enough to cut across a few outlying patches of Blighted land, or a week for
those who didn't want to risk a stray gust of tainted wind turning their eyes to
glass.

He glanced sidelong at Noxy.  She still had the thick club braid and quick smile
he remembered from his time in Stale, but her legs hadn't been that long, had
they?

He jumped slightly when Noxy said, "So, you're pretty good at giving orders
these days."

The prince shrugged. "Thanks," he said, his voice breaking again. "But Sergeant
Gyalpa is really in charge.  You'll meet him when we get to town. And Sergeant
Raneda too---she's our magician. Mostly I just try to stay out of their way."

"Well, you sounded pretty convincing to me," Noxy said. She lowered her voice
half an octave. "You two keep an eye out."

The prince smiled and cleared his throat. "I never go *looking* for trouble," he
said in a falsetto voice.

"I don't sound like that!" Noxy said indignantly.

The prince laughed.  "No, but it's the closest I can get."  He glanced down at
the road again and settled himself a bit more comfortably. "How's your mother?"

It was Noxy's turn to shrug. "She's all right, I guess.  She says she's happy to
be herding again."

The prince nodded. "I was surprised to hear she was no longer mayor."

"A lot of people are still angry about what happened," Noxy said, her eyes on
the horizon.  "When Rind said she was going to stand, *amma* said they didn't
have to bother with a vote.  She says she's glad someone else is worrying about
everything, but I think she misses it."

"I know how she feels," the prince said. "I'm glad to be away from all the fuss
at court, but I still miss it sometimes."

"Is Kulbinder here?" Noxy asked after a few moments of silence. "Your letter
didn't say. It would be good to see him again."

The prince shook his head. "He's with my brother now."

Noxy frowned. "Why? I thought he liked you."

The prince brushed a nonexistent bit of dirt off his uniform jacket. "He
probably does, but Lormay's the heir now."  He couldn't quite keep the
bitterness out of his voice when he continued.  "My father said it would make it
clear to everyone that things have changed. Sending me to Apple Bridge is part
of that too. He said that since I'm never going to rule the kingdom, I have to
find ways to serve it."

"You didn't say anything about that in your letters," Noxy ventured hesitantly.

The corner of the prince's mouth twisted. "I couldn't be sure who was going to
read them."

Noxy flushed. "I never showed them to anyone!" she protested. "Not even Granna
Fee!"

"I don't mean that," the prince apologized hastily. "It's the court I worry
about.  That's the other reason I like being here---nobody's watching everything
I do and gossipping about everything I say."

"That must have been awful," Noxy said.

The prince shrugged again. "That's politics."

They rode in silence before the prince cleared his throat.  "And what
about... you know.  You can still head-talk to clouds from far away?"

"Mind-talk," Noxy corrected automatically.  "And yes, I can still do it."  She
closed her eyes and took a slow breath.  "I can still mind-hear the cloud Rind
is riding, and the rest of the herd too.  And over there."  She pointed without
opening her eyes.  "There are some wild clouds over there somewhere."

"Have you told anyone?"  Noxy shook her head.  The prince waited a heartbeat for
her to speak.  When she didn't, he nodded.  "All right," he promised.  "Our
secret."

## Apple Bridge

The sun was sitting on the horizon like a fat yellow hen by the time Apple
Bridge came into view.  The town was home to twenty times as many people as
Stale, but seemed small to Noxy after some of the cities she had flown over.

Most of the buildings were two or three stories tall. Their ground floors were
brick and their upper stories wooden, while their roofs were shingled with long
planks bleached gray by the weather and the years.  The smell of cooking rising
from their chimneys made Noxy's stomach rumble.

Most of the town lay on the right bank of the Trout River.  Where it bent toward
the distant sea, four enormous stone pillars left over from the time of the
Pilots rose from the water.  Thick timber beams laid on top of them formed the
covered bridge that gave the town its name.

At the near end of the bridge, inside the river bend, lay a cobbled square. Even
from on high, Noxy could hear the sound of stalls being shuttered and wagons
being loaded as the town's famous Dog Market began to close for the night.

A three-story figure eight stood guard a few blocks away.  "That's the garrison
house," the prince said, pointing.  "My sister and I live upstairs in the north
wing.  The jurister stays there when she's in town too.  The sergeants and
stewards have the ground floor.  The rest is storerooms and stables and the
soldiers' quarters."

"And that's the dam?" Noxy pointed upriver where another four pillars cast long
shadows.  The wooden walkway built on them was smaller than the bridge by the
square, but still sturdy enough to support the weigh of a dozen chain-link nets.
Royal magicians had kept spells on those nets for almost two hundred years to
stop things from the Blight floating downriver.

The prince nodded. "The soldiers go up there every day to see what's washed up.
Most of it is junk, but every once in a while..."  He shrugged.  The land
downriver from them was lush and green, but only a few stunted brambles grew
upstream where the magical outwash from Fast Lake piled up.

"It must be a lot of work to keep it going.  Ulfmaerr---" Noxy paused.  "My
grandfather said magicians' spells usually fade away when they do."  *Like he
did,* she thought sadly.  The last time her grandfather had come to Stale he had
no longer been able to cut his own food or tie up his own boots.  His eyes had
been as bright as ever, but had darted helplessly from face to face as he tried
to remember people's names. That had been a year ago. No-one had seen him since.
No-one expected to.

The prince pretended not to notice the change in Noxy's voice. "It is," he said.
"The magician who was here before Sergeant Raneda managed to refresh it a few
years ago, but it cost her the sight in one eye."  He shook his head. "I know
they're all volunteers, but it's still a lot to ask."

"Cheerful as always," Noxy grumbled jokingly.

They landed in the rear courtyard of the garrison house. A middle-aged soldier
with a bushy mustache stood waiting for them. He had two wide black ribbons sewn
onto his sleeve, deep wrinkles near the corners of his eyes, shoulders that
seemed to be as wide as he was tall, and no more expression than a stone.

"Your Highness," he said, snapping a salute as the prince slid off Cloak.

"Sergeant Gyalpa," the prince acknowledged, wiping his hands on his uniform
before returning the salute.  "Allow me to present Probably Noxious of Stale.
She will be staying with us until it is well enough to travel again."

"Honored Noxious." The sergeant bowed formally.

"Please, just call me Noxy," she replied, bowing awkwardly in return.  She
appreciated him keeping a straight face---she knew how odd cloudherds' names
sounded to lowlanders.  Even in the capital, people had sniggered when Rind
introduced herself as Rotting Melon Rind.  "We'll see who's laughing when the
dragons hatch," Rind had said darkly.  "We'll see if *their* names save *them*
from being eaten."

"I take it the soldiers beat me back?" the prince said.

Sergeant Gyalpa nodded.  "Yes *sra*.  They said a farm was near by completely
destroyed.  The woman they had by them said her son-by-marriage came along into
Apple Bridge today to report some suspicious men.  He left going on about an
hour.  I sent along out some riders, but he's not on by the road."

The prince frowned, trying to guess what the sergeant would think was the right
thing to do.  "He may have gone down the south road instead of straight home,"
he ventured.  "Send another couple of riders to look---it would be best if he
didn't get home to find that he no longer has one."

"Yes *sra*," the sergeant said approvingly. He lifted the silver whistle that
hung on a fine chain around his neck and blew two short notes followed by two
long ones.  A moment later a handful of soldiers who had clearly been waiting
for just such a signal trotted onto the courtyard.

"Does the cloud need anything?" Prince Thokmay asked Noxy while the sergeant
gave the new arrivals their orders.

"Just water," Noxy said, rubbing her bruised arm.  "She'll be all right as long
as she gets some rest. But I could use a hot bath."

"Of course. I'll ask Dolly to see to it. She's my sister's nurse," he added when
Noxy raised her eyebrows. "She's used to helping people with their baths."  He
beckoned to a housemaid who had been hovering nearby, then hesitated before
adding, "It's really good to see you again."

"You too," Noxy replied, her face warm despite the early evening chill.

Prince Thokmay watched as the housemaid led Noxy away.  He should probably take
a bath before dinner too, he realized.  And find a clean shirt.  And see if
anyone knew the new Chaghan-o consul's name yet.  The outgoing one hadn't known.
"Isn't that unusual?" he had asked.

The consul had spread her hands helplessly---a gesture she seemed to use
whenever anyone asked her for anything specific.  "Some clerk was probably
supposed to send a note," she said blandly.  "I'm sure it will all be fine."

But instead of heading to his rooms, he clasped his hands behind his back and
closed his eyes, trying to imagine what it would be like to mind-hear the way
Noxy did.  A *clang* from the kitchen was someone getting a pot down from its
hook on the wall to make dinner.  A duller *clonk, clonk, clonk* from the
building behind him might be the smith mending a sword or bending a horseshoe
into shape.  The occasional *thock!* and curse from the other courtyard was
archery practice---Sergeant Gyalpa had been scathing about the local standard of
marksmanship when they had first arrived, and his opinion hadn't gone up much in
the months since.

"Am I interrupting, Your Highness?" the sergeant asked from behind him.

The prince jumped.  "No!  I mean, not really.  Any word from Sergeant Raneda?"

"Yes *sra*," the sergeant said.  "She and her troop got along back this
afternoon.  They were gone six days, near as they can figure."

"Six days?" The prince blinked. "They must have gone closer to the lake than she
planned."

"Yes *sra*," the sergeant nodded. "They found fresh tracks along by the bank of
the river.  She said they looked as made by a wagon or such."

"A wagon?  You think the smugglers are working that far in?" the prince asked.
Sergeant Gyalpa grunted noncommittally. "All right.  Tell her I'll speak with
her in the morning.  In the morning," he repeated as the sergeant opened his
mouth.  "She needs a good night's sleep, and I need a bath."

"Yes *sra*," Sergeant Gyalpa replied, his face as expressionless as ever.

At that same moment, a few blocks away, a hairy, long-armed figure slurped the
last of his tea in a small shop on the edge of the Dog Market.  He was the
shop's only customer---a few people had stuck their heads in after he had taken
a table, but all had decided to go elsewhere.  The shop's tea blender glowered
behind his counter, arms folded.

"Ah... Delicious.  My compliments on your choice of leaves."  The hairy figure
stood, adjusted the glasses perched on his snub nose, and dropped a few coppers
on the table.  "I will *definitely* return."  Ignoring the tea blender's
muttered curse, he sauntered out into the waning afternoon light.

As the stalls in the Dog Market finished packing up, the wealthier merchants
whose shops stood on its perimeter folded down awnings and fastened shutters.
Unsold vegetables were thrown onto two-wheeled scrap wagons and stacked bales of
wool were lifted onto wagons to be taken back to warehouses.  A handful of
farmers interrupted their discussion of the day's barley prices to stare at the
troll as he waddled across the cobblestones.  "Good evening and good morrow," he
said cheerfully, nodding to them and continuing on without waiting for a reply
that never came.

He had just reached the market gate when a piebald horse suddenly whinnied and
reared up on her hind legs.  "Hold still!"  barked the burly man trying to
harness her between his wagon's draw poles.  "Stupid creature!"  He slapped her
hard across her nose.

The horse reared again, almost pulling her reins out of the farmer's hands.
Rough-edged bricks spilled out of the back of the wagon.  Cursing, the man
yanked drew a willow switch from his belt.  "I said hold *still*!"  He raised
his arm to whip the horse---

---and grunted in surprise as a hairy hand grasped his wrist.  "Now, now,"
chided the troll.  "Let's just think on this for a moment, shall we?  Do unto
others and all that."

"Let go of me, you filthy beast!"  The farmer tried to yank his arm away, but
the troll's grip was like iron.  "I said let go, or I'll give *you* a whipping
too!"

The troll smiled, revealing strong white teeth.  "I doubt that.  And if your
friend comes any closer with that cudgel, I won't be gentle about taking it away
from him."  The man who had been edging up behind the troll stopped short, but
tightened his grip on the stout length of hickory in his hands.

The market had gone silent around the threesome.  The troll let go of the farmer
and wiped his hand ostentatiously on his carefully-combed pelt.  "There, you
see?" he said cheerfully.  "Your horse has calmed down.  It does usually only
take a bit of patience.  Now, let me wish you good evening and---"

A potato flew by his head.  A second one bounced off his arm.  Suddenly the air
was full of eggs and stones and vegetables.  "Skin him!" someone shouted.  "Skin
him!"

The crowd took up the cry.  Suddenly bold, the farmer swung his switch, then
yelped in surprise as he was thrown through the air to crash against a nearby
stall.  The troll spun around just in time to catch the cudgel swung at his
head.  Another yelp was followed by another crash as the troll threw the second
man after the first.

The troll charged into the crowd.  People threw themselves out of his way as he
ran clumsily for the market gate.  "Out of my way!" he yelled, waving one arm
and holding his glasses in place with the other.  He ducked under a roll of
canvas, said, "Excuse me!" to a woman with half a dozen loaves of bread piled in
her arms, scrambled up the gate post, swung himself onto the roof beside it, and
scampered away.

Meanwhile, Prince Thokmay had just closed the door to his room behind him.  A
clean dress shirt was waiting on his pillow and his town boots had been polished
and set at the foot of his bed.  He shrugged off his heavy uniform jacket to
hang it on the tailor's dummy that stood in the corner, then peeled off his
shirt and tossed it into the wicker pail under his bed.  With a quick glance to
make sure no one was watching, he stood in front of his mirror and studied
himself critically.  His shoulders were definitely broader than they had been
six months ago---well, probably.  He wondered if Noxy had noticed.  He had
certainly noticed the way she had changed shape since he had last seen her...

*Rap rap rap!* He jumped at the urgent knock on his window.  "Your Highness!"
panted a familiar voice.  "Might I enter?  I find myself in rather a spot of
trouble."

"Not again," the prince sighed.  He unlatched the window's iron-and-bamboo
shutter and opened the quartered glass pane, then stepped back as the troll
swung itself into his room.

"Thank you, Your Highness," his tutor puffed.  He stood and straightened his
glasses.  "May I suggest that it would perhaps be prudent to re-bar my ingress,
so as not to betray my route to passers by?  Some of whom might regrettably be
in rather foul moods?"

"If you mean close the window so people don't know which way you came,
certainly," the prince said, shaking his head as he did just that.  "So what did
you do *this* time?"

The troll laid his hand on his chest and blinked innocently.  "I merely
attempted to give one of your loyal citizens a lesson on how best to care for
their fellow creatures."

"In other words, you were arguing with someone about their animals?"  The prince
shook his head again.  "Mope, you have to stop doing this."

"I'll stop when they do," the troll said, the humor suddenly gone from his
voice.  "He was whipping the poor creature, Your Highness.  Whipping her!"

"Was she Gifted?"

"That's irrelevant!"  The prince's tutor waved an arm to emphasize his point.
"And it was hardly her fault she was being skittish---some idiot flew a cloud
right over the town this afternoon and scared us all half out of our wits, man
and beast.  *That's* who deserves a whipping!"

"Ah."  The prince coughed.  "About that..."

He eventually managed to interrupt the mild scolding that followed and shoo his
tutor out the door so that he could finish dressing.  As he struggled with the
laces at his cuffs, he studied the family portrait that hung on his wall.  His
father stood in the center in a richly embroidered uniform with the
gold-and-turquoise collar of Gandan securely around his neck and his second wife
beside him in a matching jacket and long flowing trousers.  His youngest son,
Prince Thokmay, stood in front of the king wearing a copy of the royal collar to
show the world that he was the heir.  Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin stood to
either side, hands clasped behind their backs.  Two years ago, Thokmay and
Jokmin's positions had been reversed.  He wondered if his brother thought about
that as often as he did.

## Familiar Faces

*She could have told me she was going to watch,* Noxy thought as she lowered
herself self-consciously into the steaming water.

"Warm enough, miss?" Dolly asked, stirring the coals in the tub's hotbox.  Her
head only came up to Noxy's shoulders, but her arms were longer than Noxy's
legs. Her orange-brown fur was speckled with gray, and her eyes were sad and
wise.

"Yes, thank you," Noxy said. "It's wonderful."  It was actually almost too hot
to bear, but she could feel the ache in her injured arm start to soften.

Dolly smiled. "I'm sure it is, after all you've been through. Now, let me have a
look at that. No, please, don't try to get up, just sit forward a bit. That's
good... that's good... My, that *is* a nasty bruise, isn't it?  You're lucky it
wasn't broken.  Does it hurt when I---I'm sorry. How about this way?"  She
clucked her tongue, then went over to the cabinet next to the window and
rummaged around. "I'm *sure* I've got some left," she said to herself.

Noxy looked around the room as the troll sniffed the contents of various jars
and bottles. The walls were painted a soft yellow. The cabinet, the standing
mirror, and the chair and matching footstool were all made of darkly varnished
wood, with legs that curved inward slightly like a bowlegged sailor's. The only
other decoration was a framed needlepoint of an eagle atop a pole with its wings
spread. Noxy wondered idly if it was landing or taking off, or just shaking off
the rain.

"That's Her Highness's work," Dolly said, noticing Noxy's gaze. "She's a fine
one with a needle."

Noxy hesitated. "The prince told me she was..."  She trailed off, not knowing
exactly what to say.

"Simple?" Dolly finished, undisturbed. "She is that.  But she's as sweet as
anyone you'll ever meet. Now give me that arm and let me put some of this on
you. It won't hurt.  Pilots know I've done it often enough for Her
Highness---it's a rare week she doesn't have some spill or other."

Noxy was thankful that Dolly left her alone to dress in the pale yellow blouse
and gray floor-length skirt that a housemaid had delivered while she was
soaking. The skirt felt drafty---mountain women only wore them for weddings,
funerals, and fancies---but when she wiped steam from the mirror to look at
herself, the clothes' soft colors set off her dark brown skin perfectly.

She dithered for a moment before setting aside the dainty wooden court shoes
that had come with the clothes. *No sense breaking my neck on the stairs,* she
told herself as she pulled on her sturdy mountain boots instead.  After tying
her braids back in a thick club, she set out to see what she could find to quiet
her grumbling stomach.

The dining room on the floor below had the largest window Noxy had ever seen.  A
handful of places were set at the table that stood in front of it, each with a
bewildering confusion of bamboo and silver cutlery.

Prince Thokmay folded the report he had been reading and tucked it back into his
sleeve as she entered.  "Good evening, *sra*," hse said solemnly, bowing.  Noxy
hesitated, not knowing if she was supposed to bow back, but then Thokmay winked.

She scowled to hide her blush.  "Don't be such a troll."

"Why not?" asked a voice behind her.  "I think it's a fine thing to be."

Noxy spun around.  The troll who had just entered the room sketched an elaborate
court bow.  A small pair of glasses with heavy brass rims perched precariously
on his tiny snub of a nose. His gray jacket set off his orange fur perfectly,
and his smile seemed friendly rather than threatening despite the mouthful of
teeth it revealed.

The prince cleared his throat.  "Um, Probably Noxious of Stale, allow me to
present my tutor, the Learned Mope."

"A pleasure to meet you, *sra*---the prince has spoken of you often," the troll
said, offering his hand.

"Learned Mope is Dolly's son," Prince Thokmay explained to Noxy, his voice
cracking mid-sentence. "He's supposed to be teaching me law and history."

"He's actually not a bad student," the troll told Noxy in a stage whisper,
shaking her hand. "He has a fine memory. He just don't know how to think
yet. Logic!  Logic is the key." He waggled a finger.  "Logic and eloquence.  And
facts, of course.  One must have facts as fuel for one's arguments..."

Noxy tried to seem interested as the troll embarked on a long story about how an
inspired bit of logic by someone she had never heard of had once prevented a war
between two countries she was pretty sure no longer existed.  It became harder
after the steward stole the prince away with an urgent question about salad
dressings and the placement of lanterns---all she could think about was what the
trolls who lived in the forest around Stale would have thought about one of
their kind wearing clothes and quoting poetry.

As Mope's stored meandered from one obscure life lesson to another, a young
woman slipped into the room and made a beeline for the tray of pies on the side
table beneath the window.  She wore a more elaborate version of the blouse and
skirt that Noxy had been given, and had the prince's round face, but instead of
being cropped close, her hair hung in a dozen long braids, each ending in a
small yellow bow.

"You've met Her Highness, I trust?"  the troll asked, interrupting himself
without missing a beat.

"Um, nope.  I mean, I haven't had the pleasure," Noxy replied, trying to imitate
the voice her mother used on official occasions.

"Well, no time like the presen," Mope said.  He shooed her forward. "Your
Highness?  Pincess Ogmin?"

The princess shook her head as they approached, counting slowly.  "Four, five,
six---there are six people for dinner tonight!" she announced proudly.

The troll straightened his glasses.  "Quite possibly, Your Highness, though
logically the most we can conclude is that there will be *at most* six people.
But no matter, no matter," he added hastily as she frowned.  "Have you met the
Honored Noxious? She's a friend of your brother."

"H'lo," the princess mumbled, suddenly shy.

"Hello, Your Highness," Noxy said. The silence stretched awkwardly.  As Mope
opened his mouth to break it, Noxy asked, "Do you always wear nice shoes?"

Princess Ogmin looked at her feet. Her wooden court shoes were dark blue with
golden roses chasing one another across the top. "No?"  Princess Ogmin said,
still shy.

"Me neither," Noxy told her. She tugged her skirt up to reveal the toes of her
scuffed mountain boots. "I was afraid I'd trip and fall down the stairs if I
tried to wear anything fancy, so I wore these instead."

The princess's eyes widened. She giggled. "Look!" she whispered loudly to Mope,
pointing.  "She's wearing *boots*!"

The troll grinned. "Yes she is," he agreed.  "And very nice boots they are,
wouldn't you say?"

After that, Princess Ogmin couldn't stop talking. By the time Sergeant Gyalpa
arrived to rescue the prince from the steward, she had told Noxy about her
riding boots, her dolls, and the needlework she was making for her brother's
birthday. ("But don't tell him," Princess Ogmin whispered loudly, "It's a
secret.")

The steward returned a few moment later to announce that the consul from Chaghan
had arrived with her replacement and was begging the prince's grace to join the
court for dinner.  "The court?"  Noxy asked after Mope excused himself.

The prince gestured at his sister, who had gone shy again as soon as the steward
spoke.  "Whenever two members of the royal family are in the same place, it's a
court."

"The Honored Yisu Chaghan-o, consul," the steward said loudly.  A portly woman
in a formal black coat trimmed with Chaghan's sky blue strode into the room, a
practiced smile fixed on her face.  "And the Honored Nangyal Chaghan-o,
consul-to-be," the steward continued in the same voice.

Noxy looked over the woman's shoulder as the name registered.  Her stomach went
cold.  "It can't be..." she whispered.  She grabbed the prince's arm.
"Thokmay---look!"

The forced smile on the prince's face dropped like a hanged man.  "What---what
in the underhells are *you* doing here?" he demanded angrily, his voice
cracking.

The man that Noxy and the prince had once known as Scholar-Candidate Nangyal
stopped and bowed deeply.  "Your Highness," he said in an oily voice.  "How good
to see you again."  He straightened, pointedly ignoring Noxious.

"I---I take it you've met?" Consul Yisu asked brightly in the awkward silence
that followed.

"Unfortunately," Prince Thokmay grated. "He murdered a friend of mine."

Noxy stared at the man her whole village had once mocked for being the least
competent magician they'd ever seen, only to discover that he was both talented
and a spy.  Nangyal was thinner than he had been two years ago, and his hair was
starting to gray.  Noxy hoped it was more than just age.  She hoped those two
years had been as hard for him as they'd been for Fernando, whose broken leg had
healed crookedly, or for Ulfmaerr, who had given up so much of himself to help
her and Prince Thokmay escape.  She hoped he had nightmares, like she sometimes
still did, but in her heart, she knew he didn't.

Nangyal coughed.  "I don't wish to begin my tenure as consul by disagreeing with
my host, but Sergeant Dorbu's death was not murder."

"Not murder!?"  "Consul!?"  Noxy and Prince Thokmay exclaimed at the same time.
"How can you be consul? You're not Chaghan-o!" the prince continued.

"I am now," Nangyal replied smugly, pulling an envelope tied with a sky blue
ribbon from the sleeve of his formal coat and offering it to the prince.

Thokmay snatched it from his hand and tore off the ribbon, his clenched jaw
making the scars on his face glisten.  He read the letter of introduction and
then read it again.

"Thokmay---" Princess Ogmin started.  Mope shushed her.  "But I don't
*understand*," she whispered loudly.  "What's happening?"

The prince folded the letter in half and thrust it at Consul Yisu.  "This is
unacceptable!" he said furiously.  "The kingdom does not accept this... this
*person* as consul."

Behind him, Mope cleared his throat.  "With respect, Your Highness, perhaps we
should take a moment and---"

The prince rounded on him.  "He threw Sergeant Dorbu off a cliff!"

Nangyal sighed theatrically.  "I did not throw the sergeant off anything, Your
Highness.  We were fighting.  It was difficult terrain, and he fell.  I'm sorry
it happened.  I'm sorry for every single person or Gifted beast that died that
day."

"Sorry enough to come back to Stale for trial?" Noxy burst out.

The scholar turned spy pursed his lips.  "Do you think I would receive a fair
hearing?"

Noxy's hands bunched into fists.  "A fair---you don't deserve any kind of
hearing!"

"Perhaps we should all take a breath," Consul Yisu said in a nannying tone.  Her
smile hadn't faltered, but she hadn't taken back the letter.  "Your Highness,
the court in Chaghan would be very disappointed if Gandan were to reject their
chosen consul.  It could make negotiations over the management of the Blight
quite difficult."

Before the prince could reply, the steward rang a small bell.  "Dinner is
served," he announced nervously.

Prince Thokmay slowly lowered his arm, Nangyal's letter of introduction still in
his hand.  "Please excuse me, Honored Yisu," he said quietly. "But I find I am
suddenly feeling unwell.  Perhaps we could reschedule dinner for some other
time?"

"Of course, Your Highness," Yisu replied, bowing again.  "I completely
understand.  I would be happy to delay my departure until you feel better."

Noxy waited until the door had closed behind the two Chaghan-o before bursting
out, "You can't let him stay!  He killed Sergeant Dorbu!"

The prince nodded, his face years older than it had been just minutes ago.  "I
know.  But that letter is genuine---he really is the new consul.  And my father
is counting on me to reach a deal with Chaghan about patrolling the Blight."

Sergeant Gyalpa had been standing at attention near one end of the dinner table
throughout the exchange.  The moment the door closed behind the two visitors and
the apologetic steward, he took a deep breath and blew it out through his
mustache.  "*Sra*, if I may---"

"You may not," Prince Thokmay snapped.

"But *sra*, I---"

The prince rounded on him.  "That man killed my friend!" he snapped, his anger
boiling over.  "He terrorized Noxy's village, and more than that, he's a spy---a
spy!  What is Chaghan thinking?  It's an insult for them to make him their
consul!"

"Yes *sra*," Sergeant Gyalpa said steadily.  "That's what I was going to say.
It's an insult, and not an accidental one, and if I may, *sra*, I think you
handled it very well."

The prince blinked, nonplussed.  "Oh.  Well.  Thank you, sergeant."

Princess Ogmin eventually broke the silence that followed.  "Are we still going
to have pie?" she asked hesitantly, then look startled when everyone laughed.

In the end Prince Thokmay declared that he was feeling much better, and that it
would be a shame to waste the kitchen's hard work.  The house staff served spicy
squash soup and skewers of grilled vegetables and salty cheese.  The pies that
followed were as delicious as they looked.

Afterward, Prince Thokmay sent his sister gently off to bed.  "Would you like to
sit on the balcony for a bit?"  he asked Noxy once she was gone.  "I'm sure the
cook would be happy to mull some cider."

The balcony turned out to be on the top floor of the garrison house. The Trout
River stretched away to the left and the right, up toward the magic dam and down
through Gandan and Latter Tongsa to the sea.  Moonlight gleamed on each little
ripple, and suddenly Noxy missed the million sharp stars of the mountain sky.

A bell went *dong, dong, dong* slowly somewhere on the other side of the river.
"Third watch," the prince observed, sliding a little lower in his chair.
"Sergeant Gyalpa had me do some night watches when we first got here, just so
I'd know what it was like for the soldiers.  It was actually kind of fun---turns
out it's a lot easier getting up in the middle of the night than getting out of
bed in the morning."

"We take turns sleeping when we're on long flights," Noxy said, warming her
hands on her mug of cider.  "As long as a couple of people are awake to keep the
herd moving, the rest will follow."

"Are you enjoying it?" Thokmay asked.

Noxy smiled.  "I love it."  She hesitated.  "And---how about you?  Are you
enjoying...?"  She trailed off, not knowing how to finish her sentence.

The prince studied his cider.  "Actually, after I got back to Gandan, I thought
for a while about becoming a doctor."

"A doctor?" Noxy said. "But---you're a boy!"

"Boys can be doctors," the prince said defensively.  "Anyway, my father said
that one more doctor more or less wouldn't make much difference in the world.
So here I am, learning how to command soldiers and argue the law."

"Do you ever regret what you did?" Noxy asked. She'd wanted to ask in her
letters, but had never known how to.

"Not really." He sounded distant, as if they were talking about someone he had
lost touch with long ago. "It needed to be done. That's really all there is to
it.  And I think my mother would have been proud of me.  But it's hard for
Ogmin. She's not... she's not very good with things changing. She had to sleep
in my room the first month we were here. She kept waking up in the middle of the
night because she couldn't hear the castle bell ringing."

"But why is she here?"

"It needed to be done," the prince said again. "If you send one royal away, it
looks like exile.  Send two, and you can call it a court."  The prince drained
his cider.  "My father *says* that her presence is a sign that he trusts me, but
I don't feel like I'm ready for that kind of trust, not really."

They sipped their cider in silence.  Finally Thokmay sighed. "I'm sorry. It's
been a long day, and I have a letter to write. Please sleep in as late as you
want.  And if you'd like to go to the Dog Market with Ogmin tomorrow, I'm sure
she'd be happy to show you her favorite pie stall."

"That sounds like fun," Noxy said. She drained the last of her cider and stood.

The prince hurriedly stood as well.  They looked at each other, neither quite
knowing what to do next, until the prince cleared his throat.  "So, good night."

"Good night," Noxy said awkwardly.  Her breath caught when the prince reached
out, but he was only opening the door to let her back into the garrison house.
"Good night," she repeated, turning and leaving him on the balcony with all the
moment's might-have-beens.

*On the other side of the garrison house, a hairy hand unlatched a window.  Its
owner waited a moment to see if anyone had noticed, but only heard the usual
sounds of servants finishing late-night chores, soldiers gossipping as they
stood watch, and a cat meowing to be let in.*

*Climbing onto the roof took only a moment.  A long leap ending in a reach and a
flip, and the troll was across the street and away...*

*A few minutes later, a piebald horse was awakened by a gentle hand stroking her
flank. "Sh, sh," whispered a voice. "Oh, look what they've done to you." Enraged
and embarrassed after the scene in the market, her owner had laid into her
flanks with his willow switch, leaving angry welts.*

*She whinnied softly as her midnight visitor slipped a halter over her
head. "Sh, sh...  Quietly now, come along."  The horse followed obediently as
the troll led her out of the stable behind the inn where her bruised master had
found a room for the night.*

*The inn's yard was empty.  Only the stars, the scarred moon, and an attentive
crow watched the pair make their way across the inn's little courtyard to a
muddy alley.*

*As they reached it, the crow swooped low over their heads.  The horse
side-stepped, startled.  "Sorry!" the crow squawked.*

*"Sh!" the troll hissed.*

*"Sorry," the crow repeated more quietly.  "There's a couple of night-soil
collectors along down Trumpet Street, but that's all."*

*"Thank you." The crow bobbed its head and took wing again, fluttering from
building to building as the troll led horse way through the alley to a run-down
warehouse on the banks of the Trout.*

*The freshly-oiled hinges of the warehouse's door made no more sound than the
window latch had.  Inside, a cheap dayglass lantern cast just enough
reddish-orange light to reveal a pair of raccoons and---*

*The horse shied again as the bear rose to its feet and ambled toward her.  "Sh,
sh, sh..."  The troll stroked her muzzle.  "It's all right, it's all right,
nobody's going to hurt you, not here, not ever."*

*"You know she doesn't understand you," the bear rumbled.*

*"She understands what I mean," the troll replied sharply.  "Is the barge still
coming in tomorrow?"*

*"If it hasn't sunk.  Or been pirated.  Or caught fire."  The bear stepped aside
to let the troll lead the horse to the back of the warehouse where half a bag of
pilfered oats waited for her.  The raccoons stood on their hind legs and pushed
the door closed.*

*The troll stroked the horse's muzzle one last time.  "Don't worry.  No one is
ever going to put a halter on you again."  Without waiting for an answer that
the ungifted animal would never be able to give, the troll climbed a post, swung
along a beam, and disappeared out a window into the night.  The air was chill,
and morning would arrive all too soon, but there was one more chore to be
done...*

As the crow tucked its head under its wing on a rafter above the horse, Prince
Thokmay was sitting down at his desk.  He had unbuttoned his uniform jacket but
kept it on for warmth---the light from the little dayglass lantern by his elbow
was midday-yellow, but held no heat at all.

He frowned at the sheet of paper before him.  *Your Majesty,* his letter began,
as his reports to his father always did. *1.  Apple Bridge continues quiet. The
Dog Market is busy, but your revenue collectors report only minor disputes and
disturbances.* He saw no reason to mention Mope's latest run-in with the locals.

*2. The tornado has struck again. No soldiers' lives were lost, but one man is
still missing, and a prosperous smallholding was destroyed.  I have still not
been able to discover who is directing it.* The prince had hesitated before
calling the little out-of-the-way farm "prosperous". He didn't think that his
father's hawk-eyed accountants would quibble over what the prince was planning
to spend to rebuild it, but Mope always told him to think two moves ahead.

*3. A cloud was injured in the same attack. Its rider is to remain here with it
until it is able to rejoin its herd.* He had almost chewed the end off his quill
writing those two sentences.  After what had happened two years ago, he doubted
his father would be happy knowing that Noxy was in Apple Bridge.  He wanted his
brother to know even less. The first time Noxy had written Thokmay a letter,
Jokmin had run through the palace holding it in the air, crowing, "Thokmay has a
sweetheart!  Thokmay has a sweetheart!"  The older prince had knocked over a
potted lime tree and two elderly surveyors catching up with him, and lost his
riding privileges taken away for a week for blackening his brother's eye.
Jokmin had made a point of sneering at cloudherds ever since.

He sighed, then froze at an echoing sigh behind him.  *Breathe naturally,* he
told himself as he slid his left hand up to the dagger at his belt. Slowly,
slooowwwllyyy...

Something thumped on the floor.  The prince leaped to his feet, knocking over
his chair as he drew his dagger.  The ghost of a small dog looked at him for a
moment, then threw back his head and howled.

The sound went through the prince's head like an icy spear. He clapped his hands
over his ears, nearly taking off his nose with his dagger as the lantern on his
desk shattered.

The ghost lowered its head and growled, ears back. The prince yelped and slashed
instinctively as the apparition suddenly charged. His whole body went cold for
an instant as the ghost passed through him and disappeared through the wall.

The prince collapsed onto the edge of his desk, shivering uncontrollably.  His
dagger slipped from his numb fingers and clattered on the floor.

The door burst open a moment later. "Your Highness!"  Someone shook him. "Your
Highness, are you all right?"

"I'm fine," Prince Thokmay mumbled. He let out his breath with a whoosh,
half-expecting to see it make a fog. "It was Badam.  He was here."

"Pilots preserve us."  The servant let go of the prince's shoulders.  Was his
name Apsu? The prince couldn't remember, though he prided himself on knowing
names.  He suddenly felt exhausted.

Boots pounded in the planked stone corridor. "Your Highness, are you all by
right?"  Sergeant Raneda asked before pulling herself up short and sniffing the
air. "There's been a ghost along here," the garrison's magician said flatly.

The prince nodded. "I know," he mumbled, still shivering.  Disconnected thoughts
and images were surfacing in his mind like drowned bodies rising to the surface
of a stagnant pond.  He choked back nausea.  "I think---I think he's trying to
warn us about something."

"About what, Your Highness?"  *Abasu,* the prince recalled fuzzily.  *The
servant's name is Abasu.* He shook his head.  The images---they weren't his
memories, they were the ghost's, and they were all the wrong shape and size and
flavor.  Thinking about them was like trying to choke down cold cauliflower
soup...

"Clear by," Sergeant Gyalpa said roughly, pushing past the servants standing in
the hallway.  He was wearing his boots and a striped cotton nightshirt, and had
his sword in his hand. "Your Highness, are you---"

"It was Badam come along," Sergeant Raneda told him.  She picked up a shard of
dayglass from the desk and turned it over in her hand.  "He's getting stronger."

Sergeant Gyalpa scowled and lowered his sword. "Get back to bed," he ordered the
servants. "Nothing more is going to happen along by here tonight."

He waited until they were gone before putting his hand on the prince's shoulder.
"If you need to yark, lad, go ahead.  Most do, their first time along this
sort."

Prince Thokmay shook his head, feeling merely dizzy instead of nauseous.  The
thoughts the ghost had left behind in his head were fading.  "I think..." He
swallowed.  "It's something about the bridge.  Or the dam.  And the Blight.
Something bad is coming."  He stood, steadying himself on the desk with one
hand.  "Something *really* bad."

"Omens weeping omens," Sergeant Gyalpa cursed. "Why can't he just come along and
tell us straight?"

"I'm so more worried as that he's coming clearer instead of going along fade,"
Sergeant Raneda said, still studying the shard of dayglass in her hand.  Her
husky voice seemed at odds with her slight frame.  "Should have moved along
since ages by, before we were either born.  Why's he coming stronger?  And how?"

Prince Thokmay let out a shaky breath. "Well, whatever is giving him the
strength to stay in this world can't be good news.  I'll include a note to my
father's magicians in my letter and ask for advice." He raised a hand to
forestall Sergeant Gyalpa's objection. "It's not like I'm going to get to sleep
any time soon." He returned the two sergeants' salutes and good nights, swept
the still-glowing dayglass into a pile in the corner of his desk, and fell back
into his chair.

He could feel the long day dragging down his eyelids as he added a scribbled
summary of what had happened to his letter and signed, *Your dutiful son,
Thokmay Gandan-o Prince* below it.  He knew he should re-read it, but instead he
drew a line diagonally across the empty space at the bottom of the page, folded
the page into thirds, stumbled to his bed, kicked off his boots, and was asleep
by his third breath.

========================================

The middle of the book goes here :-)

========================================

## Missing!

Noxy was woken by a frantic knock.  "His Highness needs you right away,
honored," the maid said, hurrying away before Noxy could answer.

She pulled on her clothes and took the stairs two at a time.  The garrison house
was in uproar.  Soldiers were looking in closets while the servants tried
frantically to remember if they had forgotten about any secret passages.
Standing in the entrance hall with his battle mask in his hand, the prince
snapped, "Well, she can't have just turned into a frog and hopped away, can
she?"

"I doubt by that, Your Highness," Sergeant Raneda said, standing at attention
through sheer force of will, her face still drawn from exhausting herself the
day before..  "Magic along by that powerful would have woken me.  And even if it
didn't, it would have such to my apprentices as certain."

"She loves to go down by the docks and watch the river rafts," Dolly fretted.
"She might have fallen in, or... or..."

"Now mother, I'm sure she's all right." Mope patted her shoulder awkwardly, even
though he looked no less worried than she did.  He glanced up as Noxy arrived,
then spoke to Sergeant Raneda.  "All of Her Highness's belongings are up in her
room.  Can't you use them to find out where she's been taken?"

"What makes you think somebody took her?" Prince Thokmay asked.

"Er, well..." Mope said, suddenly flustered, "Isn't it obvious?  She's never
wandered away before, certainly not in the middle of the night.  And the
smugglers have grown bolder, Your Highness, you can't argue with that, not after
yesterday.  I just thought---well, I just thought..." He flapped his hands
instead of finishing his sentence.

"You could be right," the prince said grimly.  "Manpa! *Manpa!* Where in
the---oh, there you are.  My compliments to Sergeant Gyalpa.  I want squads
north and south along the main road *now*.  Have them knock on every door and
ask if anyone saw any strangers last night."

"Sir, I believe by he's already sent along some by, sir," the soldier replied,
saluting.

"Well then have him send some more!"

"Sir!" The soldier saluted again and jogged away.

Prince Thokmay suddenly noticed Noxy.  "I'm glad you're awake," he said curtly.
"Is Cloak well enough to fly? You might have more luck spotting her from the
air."

"I'll go and look," Noxy said.

"I'll come with you," Mope volunteered.  "I'm certainly not much use standing
around here." He patted his mother's shoulder again.  "I'm sure she'll be all
right," he said softly.  "No-one would hurt her."  Dolly put her hand on her
son's and tried to smile.

Cloak was already floating a few feet above the ground in his pen, his edges
bunching and clumping with agitation.  He could sense how worried she was, Noxy
realized, even without her mind-speaking to him.  "Do you really think smugglers
have kidnapped the princess?"  she asked Mope as she ran her hands over the
cloud's flank to soothe him.

Mope tugged his lower lip worriedly, forcing his hands back down to his sides in
embarrassment when he noticed Noxy watching him.  "They might have done, they
might have done.  Oh, I hope she's all right.  My mother would---well, it would
be terrible, that's all."

Noxy patted Cloak's flank again.  Years ago, her mother had shown her that if
you looked straight at something in the dark, you probably wouldn't see it, but
if you looked away, it would show up in the corner of your eye.  Her ability she
had seemed to work something like that.  If she tried to feel Cloak's injury,
nothing happened, but if she let her mind wander... The spot where the branch
had torn through him still ached, but it was a dull bruisy kind of pain, not
sharp-edged.  He could fly, and she could mind-hear how much he wanted to.

She took a deep breath.  "Come on.  He can take us up as long as we don't push
him too hard." She grabbed a double handful of cloud and pulled herself up onto
Cloak's back.

"Um..." Mope hesitated.

Noxy lay down flat and stretched out her arm.  "Hurry up!" she said impatiently.

The orangutan gulped and then took the offered hand to clamber up onto the
cloud.  He gulped again as Cloak began to rise.

A few moments later they were above the rooftops.  "Do you see anything?" Noxy
asked.

"Only the insides of my eyelids," the orangutan muttered.  Taking a deep breath,
he opeed his eyes and looked cautiously over the edge of the cloud.  "What am I
supposed to be looking for, exactly?"

"Anything," Noxy said.  "Anything at all."

They flew in a slow circle over Apple Bridge, scanning the town for any sign of
the missing princess.  Not for the first time, Noxy wished she had Grappa Gas's
treasured eagle eye.  He had claimed it wasn't magic, but when Noxy had looked
through the twin pieces of curved glass in their polished brass tube, she had
been able to count the trees on the other side of the valley.

"Look!" Mope said excitedly.  "Over there!  Those soldiers---they've got someone
with them! And they're heading straight for the house.  They must have found
something!"  Sure enough, two uniformed soldiers were hurrying back to the
garrison house with a third man on a stocky pony between them.

Noxy leaped off Cloak as he touched down and raced across the courtyard while
Mope awkwardly dismounted.  The prince was still in the entrance hall, his
battle mask still in his hand.  "What's happened?" he demanded.  "Did you find
her?"

"No, but someone's coming up the road," Noxy said breathlessly.  A heartbeat
later the door banged open.  Sergeant Gyalpa strode in with two soldiers and a
middle-aged man with long, greasy hair.

"Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa saluted.  "This is Dobchang.  He says he saw a
bear pulling a wagon out of town after moonfall last night."

"That's right, Your Highness," the man said, nodding vigorously.  "She were a
big one, almost as big along as the wagon, and she looked as grouchy as all
get-along."

"Never mind how she looked," the prince said impatiently.  "Was anyone with
her?"

"Just a fellow from along by the market," Dobchang said helplessly.  "I don't
know his name, but I see him along often enough.  Skinny as a rake, he is."

"That's Muddh!" Noxy exclaimed.  "He was in the market!  He gave the princess
a ribbon---"

"---and a ring," the prince finished.  He thumped a fist against his thigh.  "He
even *told* us it was magical!"

"Now, a moment, Your Highness, a moment," Mope cautioned.  "You're letting
feeling run ahead of logic."

"This isn't a time for lessons!" the prince snapped.  He glared at the troll for
a moment, then unclenched his fists and said, "I'm sorry.  I shouldn't have
yelled.  What were you going to say?"

"I was just going to say that we don't actually know whether this person has
anything to do with your sister's disappearance," Mope replied quietly.
"Perhaps he and the bear wanted to be on the morning ferry at Two Pears.  Or
wanted to, um, to circumvent the gate fees that traders are supposed to pay?  It
could mean nothing."

Everyone was silent.  "I'm---I'm sorry I don't know more, Your Highness,"
Dobchang finally said awkwardly.

The prince shook his head.  "No, you've been very helpful.  The sergeant here
will see to it that you are rewarded."

The man drew himself up.  "Thank you, Your Highness, but there's no need for
such."

"As you wish," the prince replied.  "But I hope you'll accept my gratitude."  He
held out his hand.  Dobchang hesitated, then shook it.

As one of the soldiers showed him out, a smile twitched at the corner of the
prince's mouth.  "Back in the capital, he'd spend the rest of his life telling
everyone a prince shook his hand," he said to Noxy.  "Around here, he'll spend
the rest of his life telling everyone how it wasn't such a big deal."

"Excuse me, Your Highness," Sergeant Raneda interrupted, "But you said that the
man in the market gave Her Highness a ribbon."

"Yes, a blue one," the prince confirmed bitterly.  "I thought he was just trying
to curry favor."

"Do you still have it?" Sergeant Raneda asked.

The prince raised his eyebrows at Dolly.  "I think so," she said.  "Yes, I'm
sure of it---it's upstairs on the her dresser."

"If she has some of it along by her, I might be able to fit up a tracking
spell," Sergeant Raneda said.

The prince and Sergeant Gyalpa exchanged looks.  "Thank you," Thokmay said, "But
you can barely stand up---I can't ask that of you."

Sergeant Raneda straightened up.  "With respect, Your Highness, you don't have
to ask me to do my duty."

Dolly didn't need any more urging.  As she trotted up the stairs the sergeant
called out, "And as well if Highness's hair brush could be brought along down?"
She turned to one of the soldiers standing beside her.  "See if you can find my
apprentices.  Have them meet me in the front courtyard in ten minutes."  With a
slight bow of her head to the prince, she added, "If you will excuse me, Your
Highness? I'll need a few things."

"Of course," the prince said.  "Thank you."

As she walked away, he turned to Sergeant Gyalpa.  "She looks half-dead."

"She can stand it, Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa replied gruffly.

Ten minutes later, a dozen people stood by the water trough in the front
courtyard of the garrison house.  Some of the soldiers had put on full armor as
if they expected an invasion, and one had a coil of rope slung across his chest
like a sash.

Sergeant Raneda's two apprentices, both fresh recruits from Apple Bridge,
watched nervously as she took the rolled-up ribbon from Dolly and set it on a
small piece of wood.  "You have to put the fresh-cut end along by the center of
the block," the sergeant said, whether to the apprentices or herself Noxy
couldn't tell.  "It's easy to forget that, but if you do, the spell works along
backwards and tells you where the thing you're looking for *isn't*."

She put the block of wood in the water, then waited until it stopped bobbing up
and down.  Once it settled, she unwound a few strands of hair from Princess
Ogmin's brush and put them on another block of wood.  "Make sure there's nothing
as dangles," she said.  "See? Nothing in the water to mix everything up." This
block went in at the trough's other end.

"Now..." Sergeant Raneda took a deep breath, closed her eyes, and began to
mutter too softly for the bystanders to hear. After a moment she stopped, her
bargain struck.  The two blocks started bobbing toward one another until they
met in the middle of the trough with a faint click.

Sergeant Raneda cleared her throat.  "She's with whoever has that roll of
ribbon," she rasped.

"Can you tell us where that is?" the prince asked.

Sergeant Raneda nodded.  "The green box," she ordered one of her apprentices,
her voice still rough.  "We'll try the easy way first."

A dozen ordinary-looking stones lay a tray inside the box, each with a neat
hand-written label pasted beside it.  The apprentice set the stones around the
edge of the trough, spacing them out as evenly as he could.  As he did so,
Sergeant Raneda took out the block with Ogmin's hair on it and handed it to her
other apprentice.

"Won't it be more accurate to look for Her Highness, rather than the ribbon?"
the second apprentice asked hesitantly.

"I think I know by what I'm doing," Sergeant Raneda whispered curtly.

The apprentice swallowed.  "Yes, sergeant."  She stepped away from the trough.

"Ready here, ma'am," the first apprentice said.  Sergeant Raneda nodded and took
another deep breath.

Nothing happened, and then nothing, and then the block of wood began to float
toward one side of the trough.  When it hesitated, Sergeant Raneda said, "Take
up as the middle stone.  No, not that one, the *middle* one, to your left!"

As soon as the apprentice removed the stone, the block of wood nosed toward a
flat, blue-gray piece of slate.  When it bumped against the side of the trough,
Sergeant Raneda sagged.  "That's it," she said, her voice almost inaudible.

"Carmick Hill, sergeant," the apprentice reported.  His eyes widened.  "She's in
the Blight!"

Dolly and Noxy gasped.  Sergeant Gyalpa clenched his jaw.  "Don't worry, Your
Highness," he said.  "We'll find her."

"Yes we will," the prince said, looking at Sergeant Raneda with pity in his
eyes.  He shook himself.  "Sergeant, I want four squads on horse and ready to
leave *now*.  Full gear and overnight packs.  Manpa! Manpa, where---there you
are.  Bring down myarmor, and whatever maps we have of that part of the Blight."

As the soldiers scattered about their tasks, the prince turned back to Sergeant
Raneda.  "Thank you," he said.  "I hope...  I hope it didn't take too much."

The sergeant looked past his shoulder.  "My tenth name day, Your Highness."
Before Thokmay could answer, she swayed slightly on her feet.  "With your
permission, I think I should go and rest."

"Of course," the prince said.  "Take all the time you need."

## Into the Blight

Noxy hadn't realized how many soldiers were in Apple Bridge until she saw them
all standing at attention in the front courtyard in four ruler-straight rows.
She started counting, but stopped when Mope muttered, "Eighty, plus Sergeant
Raneda and her two apprentices, and Gemby over there. He's not part of the
troop's regulation fighting strength any more, not since he lost his leg, but he
keeps the horses happy."

The prince stood in front of the troops with Sergeant Gyalpa beside him. He
looked relaxed to Noxy, but if she had been closer, she would have been able to
see that his fingers drumming on the hilt of his sword. His brightly-painted
battle mask could have made him look like a child playing dress-up.  Instead, it
made him look grown-up and determined. The swirls of yellow paint on its cheeks
and the ribbons of rank on his sleeve reminded her of how Sergeant Dorbu had
looked the day he had arrived in Stale.  She blinked away tears.  *This is no
time to be weepy,* she told herself sternly.  They had a princess to rescue.

At a barked, "Reee-*spect!*" from Sergeant Gyalpa, the soldiers straightened up
even further.  Prince Thokmay stepped forward. "You all know where we're going,"
he said loudly, deliberately roughening his voice so that it wouldn't break.
"And you all know why, and what we face. If any of you would rather spend a year
on a galley bench, now's the time to say so." He paused for a heartbeat.  No one
moved.  The only sounds were those of birds scolding each other among the
rafters and two maids arguing about blankets in a room upstairs.  "Very well
then.  Sergeant?"

"Yes, Your Highness!"

The prince pointed at the men standing to his right. "These four squads are with
us. The others will stay here with Sergeant Raneda."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant replied.  "Reeee-*spect!*" As one, the
soldiers thumped their right fists against their chests and roared "Gandan
preserved!".

The sergeant led those the prince had selected toward the stables, while the
others hurried away in twos and threes to their duties.  The prince walked
across the cobblestone courtyard to Mope and Noxy, raising his battle mask he
did so. He ran his fingers over his short, wiry hair as if to dry it. "How did I
do?" he asked, his voice cracking.

"Well enough, Your Highness," the troll reassured him.  "Your father would be
proud of you. I certainly am," he added quietly.

"Are you sure it's wise to take so few, Your Highness?" a soft voice asked from
behind Noxy, making her jump. Sergeant Raneda gestured at the men marching
away.  "It is by your sister as we're looking for."

"My father would want me to deal with this like a soldier," the prince replied
evenly.  "Not like a frightened child. Anything could happen if I leave too few
here to guard the town." He studied the magician for a moment. "Are you...?"

Sergeant Raneda nodded in answer to his unfinished question. "I'm by well
enough, Your Highness. But please, take along with both of my apprentices. I can
handle whatever might happen along by here while you're gone."

"Of course," the prince nodded.  He turned to Noxy. "I'm sorry to run away like
this," he said, his voice breaking.

"Of course," she said. On an impulse she stepped toward him. His eyes widened.
She hesitated for a heartbeat, her moment of courage gone, then punched his arm
gently. "Blue skies and a star to guide you."

They rode out of town in two long lines, each soldier with their weapons close
to hand and their battle mask on.  There were no drums, no songs, no easy
banter---they knew what lay before them, and that some of them might not be
coming back.

The people of Apple Bridge hurried out of their way.  A few children waved, only
to be shushed by their parents.  An old woman hanging washing out to dry
straightened up and saluted.

Sergeant Gyalpa returned the salute.  "Nineteen years done by under the flag,"
he told Prince Thokmay quietly.  "Closer to thirty if you count her time along
in the Blight."

"Did you know her?" the prince asked.

Sergeant Gyalpa grunted.  "I did.  Might have married her, once along a time,
but then was then and long gone by."  His horse's hooves clopped on the
cobblestones.  "Maybe I'll look along by her when we're back."

"Maybe you could introduce her to Sergeant Raneda," the prince said drily,
smiling beneath his battle mask at the sergeant's grunt.

All too soon the city wall was behind them.  The air smelled fresh or of freshly
spread manure, depending on the breeze.  Strawberry season was already over, the
prince realized.  The corn would be coming in soon.  Ogmin loved eating corn on
the cob with a squeeze of lime juice and a sprinkling of black pepper.  He set
his jaw.  "Let's pick up the pace," he said to the sergeant.  Without waiting
for an answer he spurred his horse to go faster.

There were no markers on the edge of the Blight, no walls or signs to show where
the magically-poisoned land began. Prince Thokmay only realized they were in it
when he saw a patch of flowers that had been turned into glass. He turned in his
saddle to stare, then heard a crunching sound underneath him as his horse
stepped on some grass that had been transformed the same way.

"You'll want to watch along out by that, Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa said.
"Hooves are tough, but they're not by so tough as that they can't be cut."

"I'll be careful," the prince promised. He looked around, suddenly struck by an
absence. "I haven't seen any birds for a while."

"Nor you won't, Your Highness. There's not many that'll come along by here
except as were hatched in it. Same as the people, like."

The prince nodded. "I can understand why."

The further they road, the bleaker the land became. Scraggly blackberry bushes
hunched down when they heard the soldiers approaching as if trying to hide
behind each other, while the occasional patches of knee-high grass had a
metallic green sheen like beetles' shells and made a scraping sound like rusty
scissors when the wind brushed over them. The few trees they passed were
stunted, and the apples hanging from them were blackened or bloated to the size
of pumpkins. Even the sky above them was somehow twisted. It seemed normal
enough when Prince Thokmay looked straight at it, but seemed to swirl slightly
in the corners of his eyes.

They came up over a small rise and saw a wooden 'X' standing beside the road, as
tall as a mounted man's head and bleached gray by years of rain.  The prince
swallowed as he rode past it, grateful that Sergeant Gyalpa couldn't see his
face. He knew from the soldiers' stories that it had once marked the edge of the
Blight. Now it was two hours' ride inside it.

The sergeant reined in his horse.  "Best I ride up along with the scouts past by
here, Your Highness.  You and all best keep your eyes by wide."  He and the
prince exchanged salutes, and the prince tried not to feel grateful or ashamed
as the older man urged his horse into a trot to catch up with the leading group.

The road dipped, rose, and dipped again before a soldier from the lead squad
came galloping back with news.  "Your Highness!" he called. "There's men up
along ahead, lots of 'em."

"Understood," the prince said crisply. "Tell Sergeant Gyalpa that we'll be with
him as quickly as we can." The soldier turned and galloped back the way he'd
come. The prince drew his sword and laid it across his lap. Behind him his
soldiers did the same, making much the same sound as the metal grass had
made. He took a deep breath, held it for a second, then spurred his horse to a
trot.

Prince Thokmay expected to find the smugglers waiting at the top of a hill, or
on the far side of a stream. His teachers had told him over and over again how
important it was to make use of whatever defenses the ground offered. Instead,
they were gathered around the stump of what must have once been an enormous
tree. Eight or nine were mounted on mean-looking horses, while twice that number
with spears and swords were on foot beside them.

The prince reined in his horse next to Sergeant Gyalpa a hundred strides away
from the scruffy, mean-looking band. "Is that along by your man Muddh, Your
Highness?"  the sergeant asked, pointing to the portly figure atop the only one
of the smugglers' horses that looked like it had eaten a decent meal in the last
month.

"That's him," the prince confirmed grimly. "Do they have bows?"

"Not that I can see, Your Highness. Jinpa! They got any archers along by them?"
the sergeant called.

The soldier squinted for a moment, then called back, "No, sergeant, not as I can
see."

Sergeant Gyalpa studied the smugglers a heartbeat longer.  Thokmay could almost
hear his scowl.  "I don't like it, Your Highness. There's forty by us on good
horses against just the two dozen of them, and mostly they're along by foot. Why
are they just waiting for us?"

"There's only one way to find out," the prince said, hoping he sounded braver
than he felt.

He started to spur his horse forward, but Sergeant Gyalpa backed his own mount
into the prince's way and sidled his horse closer so that the rest of the troop
couldn't hear them.  "You've not been along by a battle before, have you, Your
Highness? Not with a sword as in your hands?"

The prince shook his head. "No, sergeant. The closest I've ever been was in
Stale, and that wasn't really a battle."

The sergeant nodded. "Well then, Your Highness, I mean no offense, but I'd be
well grateful if you'd stay close along by me and get along back if there's any
actual excitement. Your father would have my ears off if I let you get killed by
a bunch of featherless ducks such by this lot."

"Yes, sergeant." The prince cleared his throat. "Shall we?"

With a speed born of long hours of practice in the garrison yard, the soldiers
formed up into ranks of four with enough space between each rank for a horse to
jump over a fallen body or swerve around it if need be.  Those with lances
wriggled their boots in their stirrups to make sure they were set firmly.  Those
with swords hefted them to test their weight.  "Forrrrr-*ward!*" Sergeant Gyalpa
ordered.

They were still about fifty strides away from the smugglers when Muddh waved at
them. "Hello, hello!" he called. "Who goes there?"

"I am Thokmay Gandan-o Prince," the prince called back as loudly as he could,
hoping that his voice wouldn't crack and that he would be brave if battle came.
"I am looking for my sister, the Princess Ogmin. We fear she has been abducted."

As the prince spoke, the man standing beside Muddh slowly count the soldiers
with a fingertip, then frowned and said something that the prince couldn't hear.

Muddh frowned theatrically. "But how can you be a prince with so few soldiers?"
he asked. "It's such a nice day---I hope the rest of them aren't cooped up
washing dishes." A few of his men laughed dutifully.

"Never mind the dishes," the prince said roughly. "Do you know what has become
of Her Highness?"

"The princess, the princess," Muddh mused. "About this tall?" He held his hand
up by his chin. "Long hair?"

"What have you done with her?" the prince demanded.

"Done to her?  Nothing, I swear," Muddh said. "Well, all right, we *did* give
her a haircut."  The men around him started to laugh. One of them reached over
and picked something up off the stump.

"Looks like a braid, Your Highness," Jinpa said, squinting again.

"Yes, they're braids," Muddh said, as though he'd been able to hear the soldier
despite the distance. "Show them what else you have, Harjun."

The smuggler put down the cut-off braid and held up a roll of blue ribbon.  "Do
you recognize it, Your Highness? It was, what, eighteen pence a handspan?"  The
men around him laughed again.

Sergeant Gyalpa swore under his breath. "They've by tricked us, Your Highness.
They must've known by we'd use magic to find along the princess."

"Well of course you were going to use magic.  What else would you do?" Muddh
replied loudly. This time the prince was sure that the smuggler had heard
them. "I thought of pulling out her fingernails too, in case you tried to use
clippings instead of hair, but I was sure you'd keep too a neat a house for
that."

"If you've hurt her---" the prince choked.

"Oh no," the smuggler protested. "I would never hurt an innocent child---or an
innocent grown-up, for that matter. But I swear, we don't have the princess?" He
twisted around in his saddle to look at his men. "Do we?"

"No," they said, and "Nawp," and "Uh uh."

"Well, if you don't have her, then there's nothing to stop us from arresting
you, is there?" the prince snapped.

"Nothing at all," Muddh agreed. He picked up a small bag that was hanging from
his saddle horn. "Well, almost nothing."

"'Ware magic!" one of the apprentices shouted. "I can feel it!"

"Gandan preserved!" Sergeant Gyalpa bellowed, digging his heels into his horse.
The soldiers around him shouted, "Gandan preserved!" and charged.

But even as they thundered toward the smugglers, Muddh undid the string that
held the bag closed and shook it out. A terrible roaring sound filled the air as
a tornado came whirling out.

## A Piece of String

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa took turns sleeping. They didn't re-light the
fire.  By the time morning came the prince was hugging himself to stay warm,
even in his uniform jacket.

"It's cold, isn't it, Your Highness?" Sergeant Gyalpa finally said without
opening his eyes.

"I've been colder," the prince chattered, "Up in the mountains. But not by
much."

Sergeant Gyalpa sat up awkwardly and rubbed his knee for a moment, then settled
back on his elbows. "What was it like, Your Highness?" he asked. "If you don't
mind me asking."

"I didn't feel any different afterward, if that's what you mean," Prince Thokmay
said. "It's probably easiest to show you." People had asked him that question a
hundred different ways in the last two years. His answers had always seemed
inadequate. The magician Shorramarrabee had finally taken pity on him and given
him something to help explain.

He fished around in his pocket for a moment and pulled out a piece of string.
"Here." He handed it to the sergeant.

Sergeant Gyalpa looked at suspiciously. "What is by this?"

"It's a knot that can't be untied," the prince told him. "One of the magicians
at court gave it to me."

The sergeant examined the knot. "Doesn't look hard," he hedged. "Along by a
half-snake under."

"Go ahead, try it," the prince urged.

Sergeant Gyalpa raised his eyebrows, then took off his gloves and started to
untie the knot. At least, that's what he set out to do, but he dropped the
string as he was taking off his left glove. He had to hunt around a second to
find it. When he picked it up, it caught on a button on one of the side pockets
of his trousers. When he tried to tug it free, it slipped through his
fingers. He cursed under his breath and picked it up again more carefully.

A couple of minutes later, he had finally managed to get a firm grip on the
string using both hands, only to find that he didn't have any fingers left to
untie it. "It really doesn't like by me, does it?" he said in exasperation.

"Nope," the prince agreed. "And if you hung it from a nail, and tried to work on
it that way, you'd stumble and bang your head.  That's how I got this." He
pointed at a small scar on his forehead.  "It's not that the knot is difficult,
it just...can't be untied." He looked straight at the sergeant, holding the
soldier's eyes for a moment the way Mope had taught him. "That's what it was
like.  Nothing changed, except that I could never be king."

Neither spoke for a few moments. The emptiness of the twisted land around them
seemed to fill every space, every silence. "What was it like for you?" the
prince finally asked as the sergeant gave him back the piece of string. "I mean,
growing old so quickly."

The sergeant cleared his throat. "Doesn't feel along by anything special," he
said gruffly. "I guess anyone who's a soldier gets old too fast, whether they're
in the Blight or not."

They traveled as before, Sergeant Gyalpa riding while Prince Thokmay walked.
They saw mud and rocks, bushes and trees, but nothing that moved except an
occasional bird far in the distance.  Prince Thokmay tried to count his
footsteps to keep track of how far they had come, but kept forgetting whether he
was in the three hundreds or five hundreds. He supposed it didn't really matter
in the Blight anyway.

He was startled out of his marching daydream by Sergeant Gyalpa's voice.  "Look,
Your Highness," the sergeant said, pointing. It took Prince Thokmay a moment to
realize that the sergeant was pointing at a few blades of green grass and a
lonely white flower.

"What now?" the prince groaned.  "It is going to try to eat us?"

Sergeant Gyalpa laughed. "No, Your Highness. It's just as by a dandelion.  They
don't grow in the deep Blight---can't stand along by the magic." The sergeant
scanned the hills around them. "We must be coming out of it, but I don't
recognize where we are."

They saw the next dandelion ninety-two paces later. There was another thirty-six
paces after that, and another after that. Slowly, grudgingly, the rocky brown
earth let normal life take hold. The prince couldn't help but grin the first
time a startled rabbit streaked away from them.

The sergeant noticed his grin. "It's always good coming out of by there, Your
Highness." He tipped his head back slightly and sniffed. "And is that water I
smell?"

The horse picked up her pace as they crested a small rise. The rough track they
had been following ran down on the other side to the roofless ruin of a one-room
mill on the banks of the slow-moving Trout. A stand of apple trees had gone wild
near what was left of the its walls. A few brown piling poking up out of the
river like rotten teeth showed where the mill's loading dock had been.

Sergeant Gyalpa let the horse follow her head down the hill and into the trees.
As she bit an apple off a low-hanging branch, he clambered out of the saddle and
put his hand on the prince's shoulder to steady himself. "It'll be safe to light
a fire here, Your Highness," he said, wincing as he limped toward the building.
"Then we can figure out as how we're going to get back along by town."

They were just a few strides away from the building when the horse snorted, then
neighed. "Back me!" Sergeant Gyalpa said instantly, taking his arm from the
prince's shoulders and drawing his sword.

Prince Thokmay drew his own sword and put his back against the sergeant's.
"What's happening?" he whispered loudly.

"Dunno," the sergeant said curtly. He stood motionless, scanning the mill, the
river bank, and the knee-high summer grass. "Can you see anything in the trees?"

The prince swallowed. "No," he said, trying to match the sergeant's calm tone.
"Nothing except the horse."

"Stay with me," the sergeant ordered the prince. He hop-limped forward, grunting
each time he had to swing his injured leg. Prince Thokmay stepped backward to
stay with him, his sword up and his heart pounding.

With a mighty roar, Rust charged at them from behind the mill wall.  The prince
whirled around as Sergeant Gyalpa swung at her.  The bear swatted Sergeant
Gyalpa's sword out of his hand, then reared up on her hind legs as he toppled
backward, cursing.

"Throw it on the ground!" Rust snarled to the prince. "Now!"

"Keep back!" he shouted, lunging at her. She dodged his swing and batted his
head with her paw. The blow knocked him flat.

He lay there for a moment in a daze while the world swam around him.  As it
steadied and came back into focus, his head started to pound.

"Your Highness!  Are you all right?" The sergeant shook him.

"He'll be fine," the bear rumbled. She sniffed at the prince's sword, then
picked it up in her jaws and set it down so that it was leaning against a stone.
The sword bent slightly as she put her weight on it and then snapped with a
sharp *crack!*  A moment later, the sergeant's sword made the same sound.

Sergeant Gyalpa helped the prince sit up. "What are you doing along by here?"
the soldier asked.

"I was about to ask you the same question," the bear said. She glanced over at
the stand of apple trees, from which the horse was nervously watching them. Rust
bunched her shoulders and charged at the horse with another huge roar. The horse
turned and galloped away.

"Stupid animals," Rust muttered under her breath, watching the horse disappear
over the top of the hill. "Even the Gifted ones are idiots."

Prince Thokmay struggled to his feet, then helped the sergeant stand in
turn. "Where's my sister?" he demanded coldly.  "What have you done with her?"

"She's down by the river," Rust said, then snarled, "No!" as the prince started
to go around her. She nodded her head ponderously at the sergeant. "We all go
together. And we all go *slowly*, you hear? Slowly."

They made their way down the hill to the river bank, the sergeant's arm around
Prince Thokmay's shoulder and the bear two watchful strides behind them.  When
the prince tried to mutter a question, the sergeant shushed him.

A sturdy-looking river raft lay hidden in the brambles that had grown up against
the side of the mill, where the door to the loading dock had once been.
"Oggie!" Prince Thokmay cried. His sister was sitting in the middle of the raft
next to a simple lean-to, her face buried in her knees. She still had her
nightdress on, and a too-large coat and a ragged pair of boots that looked like
some beggar's cast-offs.  Nothing was left of her long, beautiful hair except
stubble.

At the sound of her brother's voice her head shot up. "May!" she cried, leaping
to her feet.

Prince Thokmay shook off Sergeant Gyalpa's arm and started to run. He only got a
few paces before Rust butted him in the back with her head and sent him
sprawling.

He heard Ogmin scream as he rolled onto his back and looked straight into Rust's
angry eyes. She stood over him with one paw on either side of his head. Her
breath was hot and wet and foul. "I said *slowly*," she rumbled menacingly. "I
won't say it again."

Prince Thokmay gulped. The bear's jagged teeth were yellowish near their roots,
but gleaming white at the points. "Sorry," he said weakly.

"Rrrmmm." Rust stepped away so he could stand. "Get on your feet. It's time for
dinner."

Prince Thokmay helped Sergeant Gyalpa slosh through the knee-deep water to the
raft, then scrambled up onto the raft and hugged his sister fiercely. "Are you
all right?"

"I'm sc-scared," his sister said, tears running down her cheeks as she held him
tight. "I want to go home."

"Sh, sh, sh," he whispered in her ear. "It's all right. It's all right.  I'm not
going to let anything happen to you." He loosened his embrace and stepped back
to look at her

Ogmin dropped her eyes. "They---they cut off all my hair," she whispered
desolately. "I told them Dolly would be mad, but they did it anyway."

The prince felt tears well up in his eyes, but blinked them away.  "It's all
right," he said again. "You just watch---the day after we get back to Apple
Bridge, everyone will have cut their hair just as short as yours."

"But I don't want to go back there," Princess Ogmin said. "I hate it there. I
want to go *home!*"

"So do I," Prince Thokmay whispered. He gave her another hug. "So do I. But we
can't, not just yet."

The raft dipped to one side as Rust onto it.  "Get off," she ordered Sergeant
Gyalpa.

"No," the sergeant replied flatly. "I'm staying with Their Highnesses."

The bear snorted. "You can get off and wait for your horse to come back, or I
can knock you off. It comes to the same thing either way."

Sergeant Gyalpa's jaw set.  "Do as she says, Sergeant," Prince Thokmay ordered.
"She's right---if she doesn't want you on board, one way or another you're going
to get off. That's an order," he added, as the sergeant took an angry breath.
"Once the horse comes back I want you to ride for Apple Bridge and let them know
what's happened."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said stiffly, thumping his chest in salute.
"It has been an honor to serve you." For a moment he looked as though he wanted
to say something else as well, but then he slid awkwardly off the raft into the
river.

"Hey!" the bear called. Sergeant Gyalpa turned around.

"Push us off before you go," the bear ordered.

For a moment Thokmay thought the sergeant was going to climb back on the raft
and strangle Rust with his bare hands. Instead, he looked from the bear to the
prince.  "Your Highness?" he asked pointedly.

"Go ahead," Prince Thokmay told him. "And good luck getting home."

"Thank you, Your Highness." The sergeant braced his shoulder against the raft
and pushed with his good leg. The raft barely moved. He grunted as he shoved
again. This time the raft shifted slightly. A third push got it clear of the
brambles.  Sergeant Gyalpa stood with the water lapping at his thighs until the
main current of the Trout caught the raft and took it away.

Prince Thokmay resisted the urge to wave as the sergeant slowly receded into the
distance behind them. Instead, he put his arm around his sister.  Princess Ogmin
sniffled again and laid her head on his shoulder.

"Don't worry," Prince Thokmay whispered in her ear. "Sergeant Gyalpa will get
help. We'll be all right."

The raft bobbed slightly as Rust sat down on her haunches next to the lean-to in
its middle. "There's food in there," she said, waving a paw at the tarped-over
collection of boards. "And blankets, if you're cold."

"Thank you, that's very kind," the prince said icily. "I suppose it would be too
much to ask for a change of clothes and a hot bath as well?"

The bear's nose twitched. "I only planned on having the princess along on this
trip," she warned the prince. "If you don't mind your manners, I might decide
that was still the best idea."

The prince bit off an angry response. "Why don't we sit up at the front?" he
said to Princess Ogmin. "We can play 'I Spy' if you want."

"I don't want to play," she whined, but followed her brother up to the front of
the raft.

"How about I go first?" the prince said lightly. "I spy, with my little eye,
something that is---"

"Bears can swim, you know," Rust interrupted from behind them. "We're actually
pretty good at it.  Even if you could make it to the shore ahead of me, your
sister probably couldn't."

The prince sat silently for a moment, then put his arm around his sister again.
"All right," he said. "If you don't want to play, we don't have to."

"I'm hungry," Princess Ogmin said after a few minutes.

The prince twisted around. "Can I get her some food?" he asked Rust.  The bear
shrugged.

Thokmay knelt in front of the lean-to and pulled out a biscuit bag and a large
jar of apple sauce. A pair of heavy blankets crumpled together made an
Ogmin-sized nest under the lean-to. A small straw doll lay beside them.

Prince Thokmay picked up the doll. "What's this?" he asked.

The bear shifted uncomfortably. "I thought it would keep her quiet," she said.

"Hm." Someone had pulled a few strands of straw part-way out of the head to give
the doll some spiky hair. Prince Thokmay felt tears sting his eyes. He gently
laid the doll back by the blankets.

Sitting cross-legged beside his sister, he laid some biscuits out on his
leg. "You're acting more like a nurse than a kidnapper," he observed as he
spooned apple sauce onto the biscuits. "From what we saw of your friend Muddh, I
would have expected you to be a lot rougher."

A rumble came from deep in the bear's throat. For a moment Prince Thokmay was
reminded of the sound that Kulbinder made when he smelled something that he
didn't like. "He's not my friend," Rust said. "We were just business partners,
that's all."

"Business partners," the prince echoed neutrally, careful not to look up. Mope
had taught him this as well---how to leave silences for other people to fill.

The bear rumbled again. "He needed eyes and ears in Apple Bridge, and someone to
buy supplies for him with the money he got for the things he brought out of the
Blight. I needed the princess. It seemed like a good exchange."

"You needed the princess," the prince repeated. "Why didn't you need me?"

The bear snorted. "How would I have gotten you?" she asked. "Muddh's magic was
good enough to get the princess out in the middle of the night, but it wouldn't
have worked on an adult."

"She's an adult," the prince snapped automatically.  The bear rumbled again.

Thokmay thought furiously as he spooned some more apple sauce. "So why did you
leave Sergeant Gyalpa behind?" he asked, handing Princess Ogmin a biscuit. The
princess made a face at it, but took it and bit into it anyway. Prince Thokmay
supposed that she had been eating a lot of biscuits and apple sauce recently.

"Why would I bring him?" the bear replied. "Nobody cares enough about him for
him to be a good hostage."

"Bringing him along wasn't the only other option," the prince said, swallowing a
mouthful of biscuit himself. He glanced at the bear.

She met the prince's eyes. "No sense killing unless you have to," she said.
"That's more of a human thing."

The prince looked away first. "Maybe," he said. "But I don't see how kidnapping
us is going to change that." He handed his sister another biscuit. She sat on
the edge of the raft and scraped the apple sauce off it with her finger, then
licked the sticky goop off her finger as the river bank went by.

"I don't expect it to," the bear said. "But it will show the Gifted that they
can fight back if they want to. It will show them that they don't have to suffer
under laws that humans have made or stay in the cages that humans have put them
in."

"I don't remember ever seeing a Gifted animal in a cage," the prince said. "Not
in Gandan, anyway."

"Some cages aren't easy to see," the bear told him, settling back on her
haunches. "I've been trading in Apple Bridge for almost twenty years, but I
still have to ask for permission to set up my stall each time I come to town.
Human traders are allowed to come and go as they please.  Every noble household
in the Ninety Kingdoms hires Gifted animals, but how many of those animals ever
become nobles themselves?"

"How many of them would want to?" Prince Thokmay asked, frightened slightly by
the anger in the bear's voice. "It's not as much fun as most people think."

"Rrrr..." Princess Ogmin jumped at the bear's angry growl and looked at her
brother fearfully. He patted her shoulder with his hand. "That's what your kind
always say," Rust rumbled. "Oh, poor us, what we do is so hard, it takes so much
out of us. The world is better off just letting us run things. Well, do you know
what's hard, Your Highness?"  The bear almost spat the last two words. "What's
really hard is watching your son run through with a spear for sport, and knowing
that the *humans* who did it went off and bragged to their friends that night at
dinner about what a good day's hunting they'd had."

"If someone murdered your son, why didn't you find a judge and have them brought
to trial?" the prince asked.

"Because killing ungifted animals isn't murder!" the bear snarled. "Not by human
law. It doesn't matter if their parents are, or if their parents love them. If
an animal can't speak, it's fair game."

She pointed at Princess Ogmin, who had covered her ears with her hands.  "But it
would be murder if I did to her what your kind did to my son, wouldn't it? Why
is killing an ungifted animal not a crime, but killing an ungifted human is?"

The prince gaped at her. "She's not ungifted!"  he protested. "It's not the same
thing at all!"

"Oh no?" the bear asked grimly, settling back on her haunches. "Then why does
she have a nursemaid, instead of a tutor like you do?"

The prince stared at her.  "You're insane."

The bear snorted. "Maybe. But I think a lot of other Gifted will start to see
things a little more clearly once I show them how."

The prince's mouth had gone dry. "I don't believe you," he said steadily. "If
you were going to kill my sister, you would have done it by now."

"Rrrr..." Rust scratched her neck. "Shut up and eat your apple sauce. I'm tired
of talking to humans."

The prince studied her face carefully. "That's what you meant to do, isn't it?"
he said slowly. "But you couldn't. You couldn't give her a doll to sleep with,
then... then..."

"I said shut up!" the bear growled. The prince shook his head, then put his arm
back around his frightened sister.

========================================

A chapter with Noxy

========================================

## Battle

The tornado roared into the sky, doubling in size and then doubling and doubling
again as it poured out of Muddh's bag. "At them!"  Sergeant Gyalpa bellowed at
the soldiers. "Get in close or it'll swat you like ladybugs!"

The soldiers charged, shouting "Gandan! Gandan preserved!" The smugglers shouted
curses back. The ones on foot braced the ends of their spears against the ground
to hold off the soldiers on horseback while the ones who were mounted drew their
swords.

"Stay close, Your Highness!" Sergeant Gyalpa ordered the prince. He paused,
watching where men were going and where they weren't, then shouted, "Haw!"  and
spurred his horse forward. The prince dug his heels into his own mount and
followed him.

The next few heartbeats were mad confusion. The soldiers had to ride around the
front rank of smugglers to avoid their spears. As they split left and right,
Muddh held up a copper hoop and shouted commands through it at the tornado.

The angry roaring column of air bent at the wait and lashed out at a mounted
soldier like a man kicking a ball.  The soldier's horse screamed as it was
lifted into the sky. The soldier dropped out of the saddle onto the ground, her
left leg buckling underneath her as she hit the ground. Before her comrades
could reach her, a smuggler on horseback lunged forward, leaned over in his
saddle, and swung his blade.

An instant later Prince Thokmay saw Manpa and Jinpa cut left, then right, then
left again to get in closer to the knot of smugglers. Muddh didn't hesitate. The
tornado snatched up one of the twins and a smuggler as well and threw them
through the air. They tumbled like dice, bouncing and tumbling again when they
hit the ground.

Sergeant Gyalpa stood up in his stirrups and waved his sword over his head.
"Fall back!" he shouted. "Fall back! We can't get past by that thing!" He
watched the melee for a moment in despair, then snarled, "They can't hear me!
Your Highness, we have to get you along out of here!"

"No!" the prince shouted. "I won't run away!"

"And I won't have a dead prince along by my name!" the sergeant bellowed
back. "Now don't make me carry you on my shoulders!"

"I will *not* run!" the prince shouted. "Haw!" He dug his spurs deep into his
horse's flanks. The frightened animal bounded forward. Behind him, Sergeant
Gyalpa cursed, then kicked his own mount into a gallop as well.

Prince Thokmay crouched low over his horse's neck as he charged straight at the
smugglers. The wind-blown grit stung his eyes. He felt rather than heard hooves
pounding on the ground beneath him. The smugglers were small, small, small, and
then suddenly larger than life as he dodged past a startled spearman and swung.
His blade hit something soft.  Someone screamed.  A spear thrust past his
ear. He ducked instinctively and roared in fear and anger and swung his sword
again---

And suddenly the earth beneath him was churning like the ocean in a storm. His
horse screamed with fear as she lost her footing, stumbled, found her footing
made a panicked leap toward solid ground. The prince twisted around in his
saddle to see the spearman he'd just cut sink to his knees in a whirlpool of
grass and soil.

Somehow Sergeant Gyalpa was beside him. "The land's waking up!" he shouted.
"His magic---it's stirring everything up by awake! We have to get out of here
*now*!"

"But what about the troops?" the prince shouted back, not realizing that he was
crying.

"They're falling back, Your Highness. Look!" Sure enough, everyone was fleeing,
smugglers and soldiers alike, as the land roiled and heaved like a living thing.

"'Ware my back!" the sergeant ordered. He spun his horse around and charged at
the handful of smugglers who hadn't fled. As the horsemen around Muddh tried to
get their panicky mounts under control, Sergeant Gyalpa knocked one aside and
swung his sword.

The prince saw the sergeant's blade connect with the copper hoop that Muddh was
struggling to hold high. There was a flash like lightning and a sound like a
bell.  Muddh and the sergeant both cried out. The hoop flew through the air.
When it hit the ground, the soil splashed like water and the hoop sunk out of
sight like a stone thrown into a murky pond.

The tornado roared in triumph as it felt Muddh's magical hold break. It pounced
on the smugglers like a cat on a crippled bird, throwing them this way and that.
Prince Thokmay saw Muddh leap from his horse an instant before the tornado threw
it into the air. He scrambled over the old tree stump to the wagon that was
still somehow parked beside it, pulled a tall mirror off its back, and dove
through it an instant before the angry tornado grabbed it.

The prince shouted, "Look out!" but it was too late. The mirror slammed into
Sergeant Gyalpa like a stone from a catapult, knocking him from his horse.

"No!" the prince screamed. He dug his heels into his horse.

Sergeant Gyalpa tried to stand, but collapsed as his knee gave way.  "Get along
out of here, Your Highness!" he shouted to the prince. "Go!"

"Hang on!" the prince shouted back, pulling up short beside the sergeant and
sliding out of his saddle.

"No, Your Highness, you have to save yourself!" the sergeant shouted, pushing
the prince's hands away.

The prince grabbed the sergeant's coat and yanked him up onto his good leg.
"I've already lost one sergeant," the prince snapped. "I'm *not* going to lose
another!  Now *get on that horse!*"

The prince put his shoulder against the sergeant's rump while the sergeant
pulled himself up into the saddle, then swung up behind him. "*Now* we can run,"
he said.  He smacked the horse on the rump.

The animal didn't need any encouragement.  As it gallopped heavily away, the
tornado picked up Muddh's magic mirror and smashed it to the ground once again,
then whirled off toward Apple Bridge.

========================================

A chapter with Noxy

========================================

## The Storm

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa stayed on horseback until they were over the
crest of the hill. When the sergeant finally reined in, the prince slid off the
horse's back and raised his battle mask.  To the south, the tornado was a dark
stain on the sky headed toward Apple Bridge.  Behind them, the land was still
once again, and eerily quiet.  There was no sign of the other soldiers, or of
the smugglers---for all that Thokmay could see, he and Sergeant Gyalpa were
alone in the world.

The sergeant fumbled with the strap on his battle mask for a moment and then
raised it as well.  His jaw was clenched, and his frown showed pain as much as
anger.  "How bad is it?"  Prince Thokmay asked, gesturing at the older man's
leg.

The sergeant shook his head. "It's all by right, Your Highness."  At the
prince's skeptical look, he reluctantly continued, "I don't think it's broken,
but the knee is along by bad shape. Put me up against that tree over there, and
go and get help. I'll be all right."

"I think I'd rather have some company," the prince replied lightly.  "Here, have
some of this." He handed the half-empty canteen hanging from the rear of the
saddle to the sergeant.  As the soldier drank, Thokmay looked around more
carefully.  There was no sign of the sun, he realized, but the land was still
somehow lit by a soft glow that came from nowhere and everywhere at once.  In
front of them, the hillside tumbled down to a narrow valley.  A few trees grew
near the small stream that ran along the its bottom.

"What do you think happened to the others?" he asked quietly.

Sergeant Gyalpa shook his head.  "I don't know, Your Highness.  But they've been
along by this before---some of them, anyway.  They'll all be right."  He patted
his horse's neck and lowered his battle mask once again. "I think I see a path
down there by that stream."

They picked their way down the rocky hillside. It was bigger than it had
seemed---it seemed that the further down they went, the further they had to
go. Prince Thokmay walked in front, while Sergeant Gyalpa rode behind him with
the reins in one hand and his sword laid across his lap.

Neither of them spoke until they reached the valley floor.  The path turned out
to be a narrow dirt road, and the stream wide enough to be called a river.

"It's further than I thought," the prince said, looking back the way they had
come.

"It's all like that around by here," Sergeant Gyalpa said gruffly. He gestured
with his sword toward a small clump of trees. "Twisted, like them. Something
that looks like it's along by a hundred yards away can take you all day to get
to.  Or it's so far on as you can barely see it, but you take ten steps and
there you are.  Raneda says it's something to do by how the magic bends the
light."  He shook his head. "I don't pretend to have the understanding of it."

"Nor I." He paused. "I thought about becoming a magician once, you know," he
suddenly confessed. "After what happened in Stale. I thought that since I'd
already made one trade, I might as well make some more."

The sergeant grunted.  "What made you change your mind, if you don't mind me
asking?"

The prince shrugged. "When I asked Shorramarrabee about it---that's my father's
chief magician---he asked me if I really wanted to spend my life giving up
things I cared about.  When he put it that way, I had to wonder. I asked him why
anyone would ever become a magician."

"And what did he say?"

The prince shook his head. "All he said was that some people don't get to make
as many choices as a prince." He shook out the canteen as he spoke, and bent
over the stream.

"Wait! What are you doing?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked sharply.

The prince glanced up. "Filling the canteen," he said. "We're out of water."

"Hold it by the strap," the sergeant ordered. "Don't put your hand in the
water. Just dip the canteen. Yes, like that."

The prince lowered the canteen into the stream. Fat bubbles escaped from the
mouth for a moment, and then the prince said, "What...?"  The bubbles were
trapped under the surface of the stream, as though there was a thin layer of ice
on top of the water.

He tried to lift the canteen from the water. It wouldn't budge. He lowered it
slightly---it went deeper without any resistance. When he tried to raise it
again, it simply wouldn't come up.

"What's going on?" he asked, suddenly almost afraid as he had been during the
battle.

The sergeant raised his battle mask and scowled at the stream as if it were a
new recruit who had just tripped over his own bootlaces. "I've seen this before,
Your Highness.  It comes along by patches here and there.  Sometimes the water
is just water, and sometimes..." He pointed at the canteen. "Sometimes it plays
games like that."

The prince swallowed. "I could have put my hand in there."

"Yes, Your Highness, You could have," the sergeant agreed. "But you wouldn't
ever have taken it out again 'til whatever it is let you. You'll probably want
to stay out from under those as well," he added, pointing at the trees up
ahead. "They might not be as smart as the ones close along by Fast Lake, but
they can be as mean as wolverines."

He winced suddenly as his horse shifted her weight. "Is there anything we can do
for your leg?" the prince asked.  "Manpa showed me how to make a splint."

The sergeant nodded.  "We can cut my tent poles in thirds," he said. "And then
we'll follow this stream. I think that way is east---the Trout's off there
somewhere. If we can make it along by that far, we can get a raft to take us
back up to Apple Bridge."

The prince noticed that the sergeant said "if", not "when", but didn't comment.
Instead, he slid the bamboo tent poles out of the canvas sleeve on the horse's
back and started cutting them to length with his sword.

That done, he helped Sergeant Gyalpa get down onto the ground. The sergeant had
to lie flat in the saddle, then swing his good leg over the horse's back and
slide down into Prince Thokmay's arms, trying as he did so to keep his good leg
underneath him.  The horse whinnied as the sergeant lowered himself to the
ground. "Just straighten it at the knee, Your Highness," the sergeant said
through gritted teeth. "Yes, like that. Good jo-aagh. No, no, it's all right,
it's all right. Try again. Use your weight. Urgh. Harder. No, go on, it's going
to hurt either way, you might as well---urrrggh."  Sergeant Gyalpa clenched his
fists so tightly that the prince heard one of the joints crack.

"Good enough. Put the poles down along beside it. You're going to have to get
the rope under it. Yes, like that. Now, easy, both hands, just lift---no, no,
both hands on my leg, just drop the rope underneath. Yes. And again. One
more. Uuhhh... All right, Your Highness, now tie it all up. No, tighter than
that. Don't worry about cutting off the blood. No, not like that. Where'd you
learn to tie knots?  Just cross it over and---here, let me."

Prince Thokmay sat back and watched while the sergeant untied and then re-tied
the knots in the rope that held the splint together.  The soldier's face was
knotted with pain, but his hands didn't hesitate.  When it was done, he nodded
at the prince. "Thank you, Your Highness.  You did all right for your first
time."

The prince nodded wearily. He wanted to lie down and sleep for a week, but
instead he stood up and brushed his hands on his jacket. "We should get going,"
he said, clasping the sergeant's hand and helping the older man get to his feet.

They set off along the narrow road, the prince walking, the sergeant riding.
Their conversation was sparse: "Watch out, that mud will be slippery," or "Put
those branches on behind me, we can use them for a fire tonight."

The prince guessed that they had covered four or five gallops in about two hours
when Sergeant Gyalpa finally said, "All right, we'll camp here for the night."
The little valley had widened and flattened, so that there was twenty strides or
so of level ground on either side of the road.  There was grass, too, and a few
blackberry bushes, and even a patch of reeds in the stream.

"Is it safe to let her graze?" the prince asked as the sergeant clambered down
from the saddle

Sergeant Gyalpa shook his head. "Not here, Your Highness. I have some oats along
in a bag somewhere---yes, good, give her that. Anything she eats from around
here will probably poison her, or turn her into a frog." He forced a smile. "Can
you see me riding on frogback?"

"I can see us both riding on one of Noxy's clouds," the prince said, trying to
smile back. "It'd be softer than that saddle, and we'd be so high up that all of
this would look like nothing more than a badly-drawn picture."

The sergeant snorted. "Thanks all the same, but I'll take my chances along down
here.  I know how to fall off a horse, but falling off one of those things..."
He shook his head.

The prince helped the sergeant onto the ground, then pointed at a clump of
blackberry bushes a few strides away. "There are some branches over there. If
you can stack the ones we have, I'll get some more. That ought to get us through
the night."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said.  He braced a branch against the stony
ground and leaned on it until it snapped, then set the two pieces on top of two
other, smaller pieces that he had already laid out.  With a pinch of fireseed
and a few quick twists of his flint, some tiny newborn flames began to crackle.

The sergeant sat back.  "Best get that wood quickkly, Your Highness. I can feel
the cold coming on."  Prince Thokmay nodded. He had felt the air growing cold as
well.

The blackberry bushes rustled slightly as the prince approached, even though
there was no wind.  "Easy, easy," he said softly. Somehow it didn't seem strange
in this place to be talking to a plant. "I'm not here for you. I just want those
old scraps of wood." He gave the bushes a wide berth, and started stacking the
dried-up old sticks in his arms.

He didn't notice the first flake of snow, or the second. It wasn't until one
landed on his cheek that he looked up and realized that the air was full of tiny
dancing white bits of fluff. "Seriously?" he muttered.  "It's the middle of
summer."  He picked up a few more pieces of wood and turned around.

The snow was falling faster now, so thickly that he could barely make out the
road. The flakes melted as soon as they touched the ground, but the air was
getting colder by the second. "Sergeant!" the prince shouted. "Sergeant, can you
hear me?"

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant called. He sounded puzzled. "What's the
problem?"

"I can barely see you," the prince said, his voice breaking. In fact, he
couldn't see the road at all.

"What's wrong, Your Highness? Are you all right?" Prince Thokmay heard the
sergeant grunt as he tried to get up.

"No, wait, stay where you are!" the prince called. He brushed a handful of snow
from his hair. "I just can't see through all this snow."

It wasn't until the sergeant said, "What snow, Your Highness?" that Prince
Thokmay felt afraid. He stumbled in the direction that he thought the sergeant's
voice had come from. The snow wasn't melting on the ground any longer.

"Sergeant!" he shouted. "Sergeant, have you got the fire going?"

"Yes, Your Highness! Can you see it?"

"No! Keep talking, I'll try to get to you!"

"But Your Highness, I can see you!" Prince Thokmay had to strain to hear the
sergeant's voice. The falling snow was muffling everything, and his fingers
were already going numb from the cold.

"Tell me which way to walk!" the prince shouted back desperately.  "Hurry!"

"Straight ahead, Your Highness! No, no, left! Left! That's right. That's right,
straight ahead! No, you're turning again!"

"I am not!" the prince shouted back in frustration. "I'm walking in a straight
line!"

"Stay where you are!" the sergeant shouted. "I'll come and get you!"

"No!" The prince paused for a moment. His teeth were chattering.  Suddenly he
had an idea. "Sergeant! Sergeant, can you hear me?"

"Yes, Your Highness!"

"Sergeant, I want you to put out the fire! Right now!" The prince dropped the
armload of wood he was somehow still carrying and took another few steps through
the knee-high snow. He couldn't feel his feet.

"But Your Highness---"

"Right now!" The prince almost screamed.

There was no sound for a moment, then the sergeant shouted, "It's out, Your
Highness. What now?"

"Just keep talking!" the prince shouted, hoping he had guessed right.  "Just...
k-k-keep... t-t-t-talking!"

The prince slogged forward another step, and another. Was the snow falling a
little less heavily? He tried not to think about it. He remembered his uncle's
stories about retreating through a blizzard from Ax Medicine during the Anuat
rebellion, then tried to push them out of his mind as well. Most of the soldiers
in his uncle's regiment had never seen Ruuda-in-Ruuda again.

But a few heartbeats later there was no doubt: the snow was easing off, and if
the air wasn't warming up, at least it wasn't getting colder. Prince Thokmay
shouted, "Sergeant? Am I headed the right way?"

"Yes, Your Highness. No, wait, turn right. Now go ahead. No, turn right again,
and---hold on, Your Highness, stay right where you are."  Something thumped to
the ground a few feet away from the prince a moment later.

"Can you see that?" the sergeant called. It was a saddle bag with one of the
tent's stay ropes tied to it. The prince stumbled forward and grabbed the
rope. Its other end was knotted to another stay rope that led off through the
snow.

"I've got it!" the prince shouted. He trudged through the snow, holding onto the
rope like a sailor holding a guide rope in a heavy storm.

One moment Prince Thokmay was calf-deep in snow. The next, he was standing on
the road with the rope in his hands. He blinked, then whirled around.  The
tied-together ropes stretched no more than ten strides to the saddle bag, which
sat dumbly on the dry, stony ground. The wood the prince had collected lay in a
tumble next to the bag.

"But I---it was s-s-snowing!" the prince chattered.

"I know, Your Highness," the sergeant said. "You're covered in it. And your
hands---you're freezing! I'll get the fire started again."

"No!" Thokmay clenched his teeth for a moment in a vain attempt to get them
under control. "Th-that's what st-st-started it, I think. The l-l-land was
ang-ang-angry about th-the f-fire."

"Well, it didn't do anything along by here, Your Highness," the sergeant said
firmly.  "And we have to get you warmed up."

It only took Sergeant Gyalpa a few heartbeats to coax a small spark to life in a
second pinch of fireseed, and another few moments to get it to catch on a small
branch. The prince wrapped his arms around his body as the fire took hold once
again. Feeling slowly returned to his fingers and toes, and what they mostly
felt was painful.

He sniffled and wiped his nose. "I couldn't see anything," he said. "I mean, out
there."

"I couldn't either, Your Highness" the sergeant said. "You were just stumbling
around, it looked like." He frowned. "Sergeant Raneda told us once that there
are safe roads in the Blight. The Pilots built them so they could cart stuff in
along to Fast Lake. Maybe this was one of them."

"B-best we stay on it, then," the prince said, his voice cracking.

The sergeant nodded. "Best we do, Your Highness." He looked up at the dull gray
sky. "I just wonder what's going to be waiting for us when we get out."

========================================

## The Bear's Choice

Rust and her two captives floated on in silence. The only other raft they saw
was being pulled upriver by two weary donkeys led by a girl who gave them no
more than a glance.  A man and a boy sat cross-legged on the raft, the man
whittling and the boy pushing the raft away from snags every once in a while
with a long pole.

The bear ordered Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin into the lean-to and then sat
in front of it and grunted a hello as the raft passed by.  From their hiding
place, the prince and princess could hear the raftsmen singing a slow, sad
song. The words floated over the river like clouds in a blue summer sky.

"Sergeant Dorbu used to sing that one," Prince Thokmay whispered in his sister's
ear. "It was so beautiful, sometimes I thought the trees were going to tear out
their roots so that they could come closer and listen."

"Did they ever?" she whispered back.

The prince smiled and shook his head. "No, they never needed to. He always sang
loudly enough for them to hear."

Rust waited until they rounded the next bend before letting the prince and
princess come out. The two humans sat down near the bow once again.  A moment
later, Princess Ogmin squeaked and grabbed her brother as the raft suddenly
lurched and began bobbing up and down.

The prince looked back to see what the bear was doing, but Rust was looking back
up the river as well. "What's happening?" he asked.

"I dunno," the bear rumbled. She sniffed at the air. "But somethin's coming.
Somethin' *bad*."

First came a rushing sound like wind blowing through leaves.  A shout turned
into a cry of panic, and Thokmay had just a moment to remember the donkey-drawn
raft before a roiling two-foot crest of water swept down the Trout toward them.
The wave was darker than the river beneath it, as if it was full of
shadows. "Hold on!" Rust roared.

The wave hit the rear of the raft with the force of a padded rhinoceros. Prince
Thokmay nearly tumbled into the river as the raft tilted forward and then
righted itself. Princess Ogmin screamed in terror. Dark water from the wave had
splashed up over the rear of the raft onto the logs and formed small pools. Even
as they watched, the pools oozed together and flowed *up* over the gunwales and
back into the river.

"Don' let it touch you!" Rust said. "It's Blighted!"

The raft was going faster now. "Up ahead!" the prince said suddenly.  "Steer for
that island!" He leaped to his feet and threw his weight against the steering
board.

The raft barely budged.  Rust lumbered over to the steering board and put her
shoulder against it. Reluctantly, the raft's course began to bend toward the
little patch of land.

"More! More!" the prince called, trying to gauge their speed and direction. "A
little more! Hold it there! Brace yourself!"

The raft crashed through the reeds on the upstream side of the island and ground
to a halt in its muddy bank. Rust stumbled but kept her footing. The prince, the
princess, and everything that wasn't tied down slid off the raft and into the
knee-high bushes that covered the island.

The dark water raced past on either side of them, tugging at the raft as they
scrambled to their feet. Rust barely had time to leap onto the island before
their little craft was pulled away.

"What's happening?" Princess Ogmin asked, frightened and bewildered.  She
started to cry.  "What's happening, May?"

The prince put his arm around her shoulder.  "Sh, sh," he soothed her.  "It's
all right, Oggie, it's all right, we're safe."  He caught the bear's eye.
"We're safe here."

"That was Blightwater," the bear rumbled.  "Somethin' musta happened to th'
dam."  She reared up on her hind legs to get a last glimpse of the raft, then
fell back on all fours and sighed. "That's the last we'll see of our food or
your blankets."

Thokmay forced a smile. "I guess we're all prisoners now."  The bear growled but
said nothing.  The prince gave his sister another squeeze.  "Come on---let's
tidy this up."

A few loose boards, some rope, the sacks they had used as pillows, and the
firepot were all they were able to salvage.  Thokmay laid the boards on top of
some bushes and piled everything else on top of them, all the while studying the
river and the bear out of the corner of his eye.  It was only thirty strides to
the bank.  He could easily swim that, but Ogmin could only dog paddle, and Rust
would easily catch them if they tried.

*If we dared,* the prince thought despondently.  The wave that had wrecked the
raft had disappeared downriver, but dark shadows still swirled hungrily in the
water around their little island.  When he broke a twig off a tree and threw it
into the river, something pulled it down with a soft *gloop*.  It didn't
resurface.  The prince exchanged looks with Rust.  Their only hope was to stay
put and wait for a passing boat or barge to rescue them.

"Look!" Princess Ogmin suddenly said, pointing upstream. "Someone's coming!"

It took the prince a moment to figure out what he was seeing. At first he
thought it was some kind of bird, but then he realized it was a man skipping or
hopping twenty yards at a time.  His heart sank as the figure came closer.  It
was Nangyal.

"What in th' hells is *he* doing here?" Rust snarled.

"Sh, be polite," Prince Thokmay told her, feeling almost giddy. "He *is* your
business partner."

Another dozen lopsided steps brought the plump spy to the little island.  "Well
hello!" Nangyal said jauntily. His jacket was torn and muddied, and there were
dark circles under his eyes. He held up a lock of Princess Ogmin's hair. "Glad
to see it still works."

"What are you doin' here?" Rust growled. "We had a deal."

"Yes we did," Nangyal nodded vigorously. He looked around. "You also had a raft,
didn't you? What happened to it?"

"What happened to the dam?" Prince Thokmay broke in. "We saw the wave..."

"Oh, the dam, the dam," Nangyal said with a wave of his hand. "I'm sure it's
still there. The river would be a *lot* more lively right now if Raneda had
managed to bring it down. It's too bad---we worked a long time for this."

"Raneda?" the prince said blankly. "*Sergeant* Raneda?"

"Oh, yes, *Sergeant* Raneda," Nangyal agreed. He sighed. "I don't suppose she
could have survived. She got that from our mother, you know. She never learned
how to give up either."

The prince's jaw dropped.  "Your---wait, you're her sister?  I mean, her
brother?"

"Stow that!" Rust snarled. "Whadda you want?"

Nangyal blinked innocently. "Why, the princess, of course," he said.  "I imagine
half of Gandan is going to be looking for me shortly. I'll need a hostage to see
myself safely away.  I've been thinking about Barra Bantang," he added
reflectively.  "I've heard good things about how uninterested they are in
people's pasts."

"Do you have a raft stashed in your pocket?" the prince asked sarcastically.
"Or are you planning to steal a cloud?"

"Oh, neither."  Nangyal splatted the mud a couple of times with the toe of his
lone magic boot. "I could carry all three of you if I'd ever found the other one
of these, but as it is..." He shrugged and smiled.  "I'll just take her."

"The girl's mine!" Rust growled. "We had a bargain!"

"Yes we did," Nangyal agreed. "But you'll still have the prince. Biting his head
off will do you as much good as biting off hers."

"She's *mine!*" the bear roared.

Nangyal flicked his wrist.  A knife appeared in his hand, its magical blade
flickering like the tongue of a snake. "Now, now," he chided, "We've worked *so*
well together.  Let's not end on a sour note." He gestured at the loop of rope
Thokmay had rescued from the wreck of the raft. "Tie her up," he ordered.

To his own surprise, the prince laughed. "Not a chance."

"Tch, tch," Nangyal clucked, keeping his eyes on Rust. "If you don't, I will,
and I'll be *much* less gentle than you."

"Thokmay?" Princes Ogmin quavered. "What does he want?"

Prince Thokmay shook his head. "I said no," he repeated.  "I'm not going to put
a leash on her."

Rust made a sound deep in her throat.  Nangyal shrugged. "Well," he said to
her. "It looks like you won't be left with a hostage after all." Without warning
he lunged at the prince.

"Look out!" Thokmay shouted to his sister as the blade of the magic knife
whipped at him, stretching impossibly thin.  He dodged aside, flinging up his
arm instinctively.  The blade grazed his shoulder, and instantly his whole arm
went numb.

"Stand aside, *boy*," Nangyal hissed, his pretended good humor gone. "Stand
aside, or---"

With a roar, Rust charged at the magician.  Nangyal spun, whipping the knife
around, but Rust's weight carried her forward even as it bit into her flank.
Nangyal shrieked as the two of them fell backward into the river.  "No!" he
screamed. He struggled toward the shore. Rust roared again and knocked him
sideways with one swipe of her paw.

The Blightwater bunched up around them.  Hundreds of dark strands wrapped around
their legs like a net and pulled them down.  Nangyal screamed in terror.  With a
mighty kick, he launched himself toward the riverbank, landing with a splash in
the shallows.  As he scrambled toward shore, a tendril of Blightwater snagged
hold of his boot.  "No!" he shouted.  "It's mine, it's mine!"  But even as he
said it, he pulled his foot free.  The boot disappeared into the river.  The
magician crawled on all fours up the muddy riverbank, blubbering.

But the boot wasn't enough to satisfy the Blightwater.  Rust roared and strained
against its dark tendrils as it tried to pull her into the river.  Prince
Thokmay grabbed the coil of rope. "Hold on!" he shouted, throwing one end to
her.

The bear lunged at it and caught it in her teeth. The prince dug in his heels
and pulled as hard as he could.  He felt Princess Ogmin's arms go around his
waist. Together they leaned back, further, further.

*Crack!* The rope snapped.  Rust was instantly pulled under. The dark water
roiled for a moment, then went still.  A heartbeat later, the only sign that she
had ever been there were her footprints.

"Well, this is a bit of a mess, isn't it?"  Nangyal called from the riverbank.
He waved at them, water dripping from his torn and muddied jacket.  "But I'm
sure you'll be able to figure something out.  Best do it before dark, though,"
he added with an evil smile.  "Those things are *much* more playful at night."

Without waiting for an answer he turned and limped away.  As he watched the
magician go, Thokmay realized that he *could* kill someone, provided that
someone was Nangyal.

But just then, his sister was still crying. "Sh, sh," he said, putting his arm
around her again.  "It's all right. It's all right. It's over." He looked at the
dark water lapping higher and higher against the sides of their little patch of
mud as the sun began to sink over the horizon.  "It's over," he repeated.

The river rose a thumb's width at a time as the day turned to twilight. A ragged
shark's fin half as tall as Prince Thokmay circled the island a few times, then
headed downstream in search of more accessible prey. Something else sparkled
across the dark Blightwater like a rainshower, and a few moments later the
prince thought he saw huge clawed footprints appear and disappear on the river's
surface.

"I want to go home," Princess Ogmin whispered.

"Me too," the prince said. He took a deep breath, eyeing the riverbank once
again and wondering how you distracted a whole river. It was hopeless.  Ogmin
could manage nothing more than a dog paddle. Even if the river had been as
peaceful as the pond they had paddled in when they were little, she wouldn't
have been able to make it without his help. Hot tears of anger and frustration
welled up in his eyes.

"..our..ighness.." Prince Thokmay looked up at the sound. Could the Blightwater
talk?

"...here..." He looked wildly around, and then up.  It was Cloak, descending as
he approached. Noxy and Sergeant Gyalpa waved at him from the cloud's back.

"Over here!" he shouted. He waved his arms and laughed. "We're over here!" Ogmin
looked up and shrieked, then started waving her arms as well.

*Down!* Noxy mind-ordered the cloud. The Blightwater was still rising, faster
now as it sensed that its prey might escape it.

*Bad!* the cloud replied emphatically. *Bad!*

*Down!* Noxy ordered again as forcefully as she could, but try as she might, she
couldn't get Cloak to drop down any further.

"She won't do it!" Noxy said in despair. "She's too scared!"

"You just have to get us close enough for this," the sergeant said, uncoiling
the rope he'd brought.

Noxy made Cloak hover over the little island while the sergeant lowered the
rope. "Hurry up, Your Highness!"  he bellowed.

"Can you lift us both?" the prince shouted back. "We're a bit short on time down
here."

"Socks and biscuits," the sergeant cursed. "No!" he shouted. "But if you can
both hang on, we can get you to shore."

Prince Thokmay grabbed the free end of the rope and tied it under his sister's
armpits. "Hold on really, really tight," he told her, putting her hands on the
rope. "No matter what happens. All right?"

"All right," she said in a small voice.

He kissed her cheek. "You're very brave," he told her. "When we get back to
Apple Bridge I'll buy you all the pies you can eat, I promise." He reached up
and grabbed the rope with one hand, wrapped the other around his sister, and
shouted, "Ready!"

Sergeant Gyalpa wrapped his end of the rope behind his back and sat down on the
cloud with his legs spread. "All right," he said to Noxy.  Noxy pursed her lips
and mind-spoke a command at the cloud.

Cloak lifted slowly, then swung toward the riverbank.  "We're up!" the prince
shouted. For a moment everything seemed to be working, but then suddenly they
dropped a hand's breadth.

"I can't get a footing!" the sergeant yelled. Noxy watched in horror as his feet
slid deeper and deeper into the cloud under the weight of the prince and
princess. The rope was cutting into Cloud as well, making a deep rift that
slowly let Thokmay and Ogmin drop further and further toward the river.

"Just a few more heartbeats!" Noxy yelled. "Thokmay, hang on! Hang on!"

"Lift up your feet," Thokmay grunted at his sister. He could hear the
Blightwater chuckling below them.

"I'm scared!" Ogmin said.

"Just lift up your feet!"  Ten strides... eight... five...

His heels splashed into the river. "Run!" he shouted at his sister. A hundred
tiny tendrils tugged at his boots as he pushed her through the reeds toward the
bank. The soft mud underneath them seemed to be coming alive. They scrambled up,
grabbing bushes and branches and dandelions and anything else that offered a
handhold until they reached the top of the riverbank and flopped down.

Prince Thokmay lay there for a moment, panting, then rolled over and started
untying the knot around his sister. "Thokmay?" she asked.

"What?" he gasped as he undid the last of the knot.

"I *really* want to go home."

## The End of the Letter

*Your Majesty,* Thokmay began, as always. Then he paused, listening to the rain
tap against the window and wondering yet again what it would have been like to
grow up calling his father something a little less formal than that. Ogmin was
singing to herself in the next room, and he could hear Dolly's voice as well,
although he couldn't make out what she was saying.

He dipped his pen in the inkwell and continued. *1. I am writing to inform you
that my tutor has decided to leave your service to pursue opportunities
elsewhere. I have been well pleased with him, particularly during the recent
difficulties described in the reports which I trust you have by now
received. Unless I am instructed otherwise, I shall commend him to future
patrons.*

*Although I probably won't need to do so soon,* Thokmay added mentally. He had
tried to talk the troll out of leaving, but Mope had made up his mind. "I've
been trying to train you like the circus man trained my father," Mope had said,
his face even longer than usual.  "It's time I did a few of my own tricks for a
change."

"Where will you go?" Thokmay asked.

The troll twiddled his big toes. "Former or Latter Tongsa, perhaps, or
Chaghan. Or maybe even Araña. Anyone can argue the law in Araña."

"Argue the law?" "Araña?" the prince and Noxy prince asked simultaneously.

"Absolutely," Mope said earnestly. "Eloquence and logic, logic and eloquence,
that's the key. Did you know that gifted animals still aren't allowed to own
land in Former Tongsa? They can in Chaghan, but they need a human's permission
to marry. And there was a monstrous case in Garheim, Your Highness will remember
we discussed it some months ago, which concluded that---"

"Enough, enough," the prince laughed. "If anyone can talk the world into better
shape, you can." On an impulse he hugged his tutor.  "I'll miss you."

The troll hugged him back clumsily. "And I you, Your Highness," he said. "You
had a pretty good sense of humor, for a human."

The ink on Thokmay's pen had dried. He wiped it carefully on a scrap of paper
and dipped it in the inkwell again. *2. The Honored Noxious has rejoined her
companions. They are returning to the mountains for the winter, but I have given
her the freedom of the kingdom and taken the liberty of inviting her to visit
the capital whenever she might choose to do so.*

"Or something like that," the prince muttered under his breath. The other
cloudherds had flown into Apple Bridge the day before. They had been appalled by
the destruction, and Aft had been furious when she had learned of the part that
Noxy had played.

"Cloak could have been torn to shreds!" Rind raged. "And you too!  You could
have been killed!"

Noxy folded her arms and glared at the older woman. "Or half of Gandan could
have been flooded with poisonous old magic. Or Princess Ogmin could have drowned
when her raft floated away." That was the story the prince, Sergeant Gyalpa, and
Noxy had agreed on during the flight back to Apple Bridge---the princess had
been playing on a raft, and it had floated away. Mope had thanked them for
that. "Or I could have tripped over a pebble and broken my nose. Would you have
liked that more?"

Neither saw the looks on the other cloudherds' faces, but the prince did. "We
are of course grateful for Noxy's assistance in this matter," he said hastily in
his most official voice. On an impulse, he continued, "In recognition of which,
we offer her the freedom of Gandan, so that she may travel throughout the
kingdom without hindrance, and call upon His Majesty's servants for aid as she
may require." For the first time, the prince was glad that Mope had made him
practice that speech so many times, so that he could say it without stumbling.

Rind had glowered at the prince and Noxy, but the other cloudherds had clapped.
FIXME

Noxy and the prince said their real good-byes an hour later. "I'm glad you let
me stay," Noxy said, stroking Cloak's flank, somehow not able to meet the
prince's eyes.

"I'm glad too," the prince said, feeling equally awkward. He paused a moment,
then added, "Even if all of this hadn't happened, I'd be glad." He waved at her
a few moments later as Cloud climbed into the sky, breathless at how soft her
lips had been.

There was a clatter next door. "Excuse me, Your Highness," Dolly called out,
"But will Her Highness be needing her summer dresses, or may I put them in
storage?"

"Pack everything, please," Prince Thokmay replied loudly. "We won't be coming
back."

There was a moment's silence, and then the door to the prince's study slowly
creaked open. Princess Ogmin peeked around the door. She was still wearing a
dark silk scarf on her head, despite the number of times Dolly and the prince
had told her how grown-up her short hair made her look.

"Are we going home?" Ogmin asked.

"Mm hm," the prince said. He smiled at her. "We really are."

"Wheee!" Ogmin shrieked. She bounded into the room and hugged him.  "We're going
home!"

"Whoa, whoa!" he laughed, "Watch out for the inkpot!" He squeezed her tight so
that he could wipe his eyes without her seeing him do it. "But only if you help
Dolly pack, all right?"

"I'll help!" she promised. She ran out of the room. "Did you hear? Did you?" he
heard her say.

It wasn't Dolly who answered. "What's happening?" Raneda asked uncertainly.
Prince Thokmay stared down at his letter as Princess Ogmin tried to explain. The
sergeant had been unconscious for two days after the fight at the dam. When she
had awaken, her mind had been as clear and as empty as a baby's. It had only
taken her a few days to remember how to feed herself, but her progress since
then had been slow. She seemed to remember nothing of her former life, and her
former apprentices said she probably never would.

Princess Ogmin was still in the middle of her description of the wonderful
things to eat in the capital when Raneda interrupted. "Do you think we should
call this one Rose?" she asked. "Or Lily?"  The prince could imagine her holding
up one of Ogmin's many dolls.

"Lily," the princess said decisively. "Because her hair is so beautiful."

The prince smiled and turned back to his letter and wrote, *3. As there is no
longer an immediate threat to Apple Bridge, and as I believe your daughter would
be happier in the familiar surroundings of the capital, I am returning with her
to Gandan.* He had lain in bed most of the previous night, watching the moon
rise and then set, trying to work up the courage to write those words. For a
moment, he imagined crumpling up the letter and starting a new one.  Instead, he
took a deep breath, drew a diagonal line across the empty space on the page, and
at the bottom wrote, *Your dutiful*.

He hesitated only a moment before adding, for the first time, *and loving*, then
finished, *son, Thokmay Gandan-o Prince*. He let his breath out with a whoosh,
put his pen back in the inkwell, folded the letter, dripped some wax on it, and
pressed his signet ring into the wax to seal it. Then he leaned back in his
chair and stretched like a cat.

Years later, when his hair was starting to turn gray and the scar that the
world's last wolf had left in his arm ached in cold weather, Prince Thokmay
finally heard what had happened when his father had received that letter. "He
just smiled," the old steward said to him. "Like he used to sometimes before
your mother passed away." But there are many more stories to tell before that
one.
