<!-- 2017-02-18 -->
## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by a great ocean whose outer
shore, the Worldrim, rises up to hold that sweet speck of life as a
child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Cherne's history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as
well.  Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a century-long
Mutiny that scarred the moon, turned Lake Karaband into a sea of
glass, and littered the land with strange magic.  When it was over the
Pilots were gone, leaving the world to carry on as best it could.*

*Now look there, where the Brumoso Mountains tumble down to the ocean
and ninety-nine little kingdoms squabble with their neighbors.  A
small flock of clouds is flying west over fields and forest.  No, not
just flying, but fleeing---fleeing for their lives.  That is where
this story begins...*

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 1: Reunion

The tornado roared, tearing at the fields beneath it like an angry
child pulling up handfuls of grass.  *Left! Left!* Noxy mind-shouted,
desperately hoping the young cloud she was riding wouldn't panic.

Charger hesitated. *Left!* Noxy ordered.

As the cloud finally obeyed, Noxy heard a mighty *crack!*.  She hoped
it was just an apple tree being snapped in two---she had seen farmers'
cottages nestled among the orchards below before the tornado appeared.
There had been people, too, running for cover from the disaster that
had attacked them out of a clear blue sky.

Noxy could barely see Aft and the others in front of her. She wiped
grit from her eyes, but more immediately blew into her face. *Faster!*
she urged Charger. Her cloud struggled to obey.  She could mind-hear
him tiring.

Suddenly a branch as thick as Noxy's leg tore upward through the cloud
and clubbed her shoulder. She was airborne for one sickening heartbeat
before falling back onto Charger.  She clutched him with one hand and
held on as tightly as she could.  *Down!  Down!  Down!* she
mind-shouted, not realizing that she was screaming the words as well.

The injured cloud plummeted toward the ground. Noxy glanced back,
afraid the tornado would follow, but it was standing above a pile of
wreckage that had been a barn moments before, tearing the boards apart
and whirling them around. "Oh no!" Noxy gasped as she saw people
holding hands tumble through the air, but it was just laundry on a
clothesline.

Charger scraped against the trees, then sagged to the ground with a
mind-spoken mewl of pain. Noxy slid down his side, gasping as she
jostled her bruised arm. The branch had torn open her gray leather
coat and the quilted sleeve of the heavy shirt she wore underneath it,
but had only scraped her skin. Her knees went weak as she realized how
close a call she'd had.

The tornado began moving away.  She and Charger had come down on a
narrow dirt track through a patch of forest that lay between two apple
orchards.  The summer-green branches of the oaks and maples around
them still shook in the wind, but she and Charger were safe.  For now.

She took a shaky breath.  Aft and the other cloudherds would have seen
her come down.  They would come looking for her.  If they could.

Heavy hooves drummed on the road behind her. Half a dozen soldiers in
yellow coats galloped toward her on stocky black horses. She struggled
to her feet with a grimace.

The lead rider reined in a few paces away. "Are you all right?" he
asked, pulling down the black-and-yellow bandanna that protected his
mouth and nose from the wind-blown grit.

"I'm fine," Noxy said, cradling her bruised arm. "But my cloud has
been hurt. Did you see the others?"

"They went along west," the soldier said, pointing.  "Looks like they
all got by clear."

Another rider shouldered his horse past him.  "Noxy?" he asked
incredulously, his voice breaking. "Is that you?"

Noxy stared at the newcomer.  How did he know her name?

The rider pulled up his battle mask.  "Noxy---what are you doing
here?"

"Thokmay?"  Noxy stared at the prince of Gandan, cloud and arm both
momentarily forgotten.  "How---" And then the world spun around her
and she sagged back against her cloud.

"Noxy!" The prince leaped down from his horse. With three quick
strides he was beside her. He paid no attention to Charger edging away
nervously as he caught her by her good arm and helped her sit back
down on the hard-packed dirt track.

"I'm all right," Noxy protested, shaking him off weakly. "It's Charger
that's been hurt." She tried to struggle back to her feet, but the
prince put a hand on her shoulder to stop her.

"Just sit a moment," he said firmly. "Jinpa!"

"Honored?" one of the soldiers answered.

"That farm we passed," the prince said, pointing back along the
track. "See if you can get help."

"Honored!" the soldier replied. He snapped his horse's reins, only to
pull up sharply when Noxy said, "Wait!"

This time the prince didn't stop her from getting up. "The farm's
gone," she said. "The tornado tore it to pieces."

The prince's jaw tightened. "Manpa!" he barked, his voice breaking
again.  "You go with Jinpa. See if there are any survivors. Double
time!" The two soldiers galloped away.

The prince looked back at Noxy. "Well," he said in a gentler voice.
"It's good to see you again, but what are you doing *here*?  It's a
long way from Stale."

Noxy shrugged, then winced. This wasn't how she had imagined meeting
Prince Thokmay again, not at all. "We were on our way to Chaghan.  Aft
got a contract for some rain there---she's the mayor now---and Apple
Bridge was sort of on the way, and..."  She shrugged again to hide her
embarrassment.  She had wanted to surprise him...

Before the prince could reply, one of soldiers called out,
"Sir---above us!"  The other clouds had returned.

Aft brought her cloud down onto the road two dozen strides from
Charger and slid off while he was still settling. Like Noxy, he wore
his black hair in long braids, but his leather coat was fringed with
red and orange twists of ribbon.  His dark face was as narrow and as
fierce as a mountain hawk's.

He strode over to Charger without as much as glancing at Noxy, the
prince, or the soldiers and laid her hands on its flank.  "Sh, sh,
sh," he said soothingly as he closed her eyes to mind-speak with the
injured cloud.

Thokmay caught Noxy's eye and raised his eyebrows.  Noxy hesitated
before shaking her head slightly.  She still hadn't told anyone that
she could mind-talk to clouds without touching them.  The prince
nodded.

Aft gave Charger one last reassuring pat.  "He could have been torn to
shreds," he said to Noxy flatly. "And *you* could have been killed.
I'd never have heard the end of *that*."

"Yes, honored," Noxy said, eyes downcast.

"Don't you 'honored' me," Aft growled.  He turned to Prince Thokmay.
"I apologize, um, commander, if my companion here has caused you any
trouble. I'm sure we can take care of this now."

"Oh, it's no trouble," the prince said mildly, his voice cracking.
"But now that you're here, I was hoping Noxy and I would have a chance
to catch up."  He held the cloudherd's gaze, fourteen looking at
forty, for the half-dozen heartbeats it took the older man to realize
who he was.

As Aft opened her mouth to speak, the prince continued, "We were on
our way to escort the new consul from Chaghan into Apple Bridge when
we spotted the tornado.  I expect he'll have gone on ahead, but we
should get moving too in case it comes back."

Aft's eyes narrowed. "Come back?"  He hesitated before grudgingly
adding, "Honored?"

The prince nodded. "It's not just some monster out of the Blight. The
first attack was on a farmer who let us borrow his truffle pigs to
track some smugglers.  There have been two more since, all on people
who were trying to help us."

"I've never heard of anyone summoning a tornado," Aft said
skeptically. "How could back-country folk ever work magic like that?"

"They couldn't," the prince said, "But they can find it and use it.
That tornado probably came out of a bottle at the bottom of Fast Lake.
Some smuggler must have found it floating down the river.  It's just
our bad luck that---"

"Honored!" The soldiers who had gone down the road had come trotting
back. Two frightened boys in hand-me-down clothes were sitting behind
Jinpa, while an old woman rode behind Manpa.

The two boys stared wide-eyed at the nearby clouds while their
grandmother told her story.  Her son-in-law, it was his farm, she'd
moved in after the children were born, and they'd been out pruning,
her daughter and her husband that is, not the boys, and they'd seen
some men in the forest with a cart, and, well, everyone knew some
people had a little business now and again that other folk shouldn't
pry into, but these weren't anyone her son-in-law recognized, and
they'd talked about it and decided they ought to tell someone, and
they needed some new clothes for the boys, they were growing so fast,
so they'd gone into town that morning, and then that *thing* came out
of nowhere, and the boys had been so brave, but what was she going to
tell her daughter and her son-in-law about the cottage?  The roof was
gone, and the chicken coop, and the whole *barn*, and---

"The king will pay to have it all rebuilt," the prince told her
soothingly. "But right now, my men will see you safely into Apple
Bridge.  You can stay there until we find out who's behind this."

The old woman nodded, fighting tears.  The prince turned back to
Noxy. "You would be welcome in Apple Bridge as well, of course. You
and all your companions."

"That's impossible," Aft said sharply. "We've already lost half a day,
and if the tornado comes back like you said---"

"But Charger is hurt," Noxy protested. "She needs to rest for a few
days, or she'll never make it to Chaghan, much less back home."

"We can't afford dawdle around for a week," Aft snapped.  "Chaghan's
crops haven't seen rain in a month.."

"Well then, I'll stay here with Charger until he's better," Noxy
declared.

"Oh no you won't," Aft told her, glaring. "I'm not leaving one of my
riders out here in the middle of nowhere. Especially not one with your
talent for finding trouble!"

"I'm old enough to take care of myself!" Noxy said indignantly.

"Just like you took care of Charger?"

"I will take responsibility for her," the prince said, stepping
between the two.  "They can stay at the garrison house until they're
able to catch up with you."

Aft threw up his hands. "Like mother, like daughter," he said to
no-one in particular. "Do as you please---you always have.  Just
promise me you won't go looking for trouble."

"I never go *looking* for trouble," Noxy muttered, but Aft was already
climbing back onto his cloud. A few moments later he was airborne,
heading west with the rest of the herd.

The prince's carefully polite expression turned wistful as he watched
the clouds fly away. "Can you two make it to Apple Bridge?" he asked
Noxy.

She put her hand on Charger's flank and closed her eyes to mind-speak
with him before nodding. "Yes, if we go slowly. I've been pushing him
pretty hard to keep up with the others," she added, feeling a sudden
pang of guilt. "I think that's why we couldn't get away from the
tornado like they did."

The prince handed his horse's reins to Jinpa. "Put the lady and her
young men on Bucketbreath here," he ordered. "See them safely back to
Apple Bridge, and tell the staff that they're to be put up in the
garrison guest house if they can't find something more suitable.  I
will take the cloud back with Respected Noxious."

The soldier cleared his throat. "Um, honored, are you sure---"

"We'll all be safer if someone is in a position to spot the tornado
returning," the prince said crisply.

"Yes sir," Jinpa replied doggedly, "But---well, Sergeant Gyalpa said
to be double sure you were back along the garrison in time for the
dinner tonight.  With the new consul, sir.  It being protocol and
along like that."

The prince muttered something under his breath that Noxy was glad she
couldn't hear properly.  "The cloud won't be any slower than
horseback," he told Jinpa.  "And if I'm late, I'll tell the good
sergeant it was my fault."

"Yes sir," Jinpa said glumly.  He exchanged a look with Manpa.  It
wouldn't matter to the sergeant whose fault the prince said it was...

Prince Thokmay pointed at the two little boys.  "You two keep an eye
out as well," he said sternly. "If you see any sign of trouble, you
tell these men right away, all right?"

"Yes, honored," the older one said. His brother just stared wide-eyed
at the prince, the cloud, and the big wide world he'd suddenly found
himself in.

The prince pulled himself up onto Charger behind Noxy, then sat
quietly as she coaxed the injured cloud into the air. They levelled
off a hundred strides above the forest and turned toward Apple Bridge.

The soft, slightly damp feel of the cloud brought memories flooding
back to the prince. The last time he had flown had been two years
ago. A lot had changed since then, but not the exhiliration of being
able to see everything: the hackthorn bushes in their summer finery,
the apple orchards, a family of deer by a stream, a farmer shading his
eyes to look up at the cloud...

And there, in the distance, the Blight.  Centuries ago, the Pilots had
dumped their leftover magic there, from spells gone wrong to enchanted
creatures so dangerous that even the greatest magicians were afraid of
them.  At its center lay Fast Lake, where a year might pass for every
day in the normal world.  Around it, the land was---strange.  Some
parts were completely barren, while others were crowded with purple
trees whose limbs swayed in time to music no human being had ever
heard.  Chaghan lay on the far side, three days' hard ride for anyone
brave enough to cut across a few outlying patches of Blighted land, or
a week for those who didn't want to risk a stray gust of tainted wind
turning their eyes to flowers.

The prince jumped slightly when Noxy said, "You're pretty good at
giving orders these days."

The prince shrugged. "Thanks," he said, his voice breaking again. "But
Sergeant Gyalpa is really in charge.  You'll meet him when we get to
town. And Sergeant Dambu too---she's the troop's magician. Mostly I
just try to stay out of their way."

"Well, it sounded pretty convincing to me," Noxy said. She lowered her
voice half an octave. "'You two keep an eye out'. It reminded me of
Sergeant Dorbu."

The prince smiled and cleared his throat. "'I never go *looking* for
trouble'," he said in a falsetto voice.

"I don't sound like that!" Noxy said indignantly.

The prince laughed.  "No, but it's the closest I can come."  He
glanced down at the road again and settled himself a bit more
comfortably on the cloud. "How's your mother?"

It was Noxy's turn to shrug. "She's all right, I guess.  She's happy
to be herding again instead of running things."

The prince nodded. "Your letter said. I was surprised to hear she was
no longer mayor."

"A lot of people are still angry about what happened," Noxy said, her
eyes on the horizon.  "So when Aft said he was going to stand, there
wasn't even an election.  She says she's glad that someone else is
worrying about everything, but I think she misses it."

"I know how she feels," the prince said. "Things have been a lot
different for me too, but I'm actually glad to be out here, away from
all the fuss at court."

"Is Kulbinder here?" Noxy asked. "Your letter didn't say. It would be
good to see him again."

The prince shook his head. "He's with my brother now."

Noxy frowned. "Why? I thought he liked you."

The prince shrugged. "He probably does, but Lormay's the heir now."
He couldn't quite keep the bitterness out of his voice when he
continued, "My father said it would make it clear to everyone that
things have changed. Sending me to Apple Bridge is part of that
too. He said that since I'm never going to rule, I have to learn how
to serve."

"You didn't say anything about that in your letters," Noxy said
hesitantly.

The corner of the prince's mouth twisted into a half-smile. "I
couldn't be sure who was going to read them."

Noxy flushed. "I never showed them to anyone!" she protested. "Not
even my grandmother!"

"I don't mean that," the prince apologized hastily. "It's just that
some people at court thought they should keep an eye on me, at least
at first.  That's another reason I like being here---everyone isn't
watching everything I do and gossipping about everything I say."

"That's horrible!" Noxy exclaimed.

The prince shrugged again. "That's politics."

They rode in silence before the prince cleared his throat.  "And what
about... you know.  You can still head-talk to clouds from far away?"

"Mind-talk," Noxy corrected automatically.  "And yes, I can still do
it."  She closed her eyes and took a slow breath.  "I can still
mind-hear the cloud Aft is riding, and the rest of the herd too.  And
over there."  She pointed without opening her eyes.  "There are some
wild clouds over there somewhere."

"And you still haven't told anyone?"

Noxy shook her head.  "Only my granna."  The cloudherds had stories
about people who could mind-talk to clouds without touching them, none
of them with happy endings.

The prince waited another heartbeat for her to speak.  When she
didn't, he nodded.  "All right," he promised.  "Our secret."
