## Prolog

*Consider Cherne.  A diamond adrift in the heavens, its single
continent is surrounded on all sides by a great ocean whose outer
shore, the Worldrim, rises up to hold that sweet speck of life as a
child might cup a drop of water in her hand.*

*Cherne's history began with the Pilots, and nearly ended with them as
well.  Powerful and inhuman, their reign ended in a century-long
Mutiny that scarred the moon, turned Lake Karaband into a sea of
glass, and littered the land with strange magic.  When it was over the
Pilots were gone, leaving the world to carry on as best it could.*

*Now look there, where the Brumoso Mountains tumble down to the ocean
and ninety-nine little kingdoms squabble with their neighbors.  A
small flock of clouds is flying west over fields and forest.  No, not
just flying, but fleeing---fleeing for their lives.  That is where
this story begins...*

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 1: Reunion

The tornado roared, tearing at the fields beneath it like an angry
child pulling up handfuls of grass.  *Left! Left!* Noxy mind-shouted,
desperately hoping the young cloud she was riding wouldn't panic.

Charger hesitated. *Left!* Noxy ordered.

As the cloud finally obeyed, Noxy heard a mighty *crack!*.  She hoped
it was just an apple tree being snapped in two---she had seen farmers'
cottages nestled among the orchards below before the tornado appeared.
There had been people, too, running for cover from the disaster that
had attacked them out of a clear blue sky.

Noxy could barely see Aft and the others in front of her. She wiped
grit from her eyes, but more immediately blew into her face. *Faster!*
she urged Charger. Her cloud struggled to obey.  She could mind-hear
him tiring.

Suddenly a branch as thick as Noxy's leg tore upward through the cloud
and clubbed her shoulder. She was airborne for one sickening heartbeat
before falling back onto Charger.  She clutched him with one hand and
held on as tightly as she could.  *Down!  Down!  Down!* she
mind-shouted, not realizing that she was screaming the words as well.

The injured cloud plummeted toward the ground. Noxy glanced back,
afraid the tornado would follow, but it was standing above a pile of
wreckage that had been a barn moments before, tearing the boards apart
and whirling them around. "Oh no!" Noxy gasped as she saw people
holding hands tumble through the air, but it was just laundry on a
clothesline.

Charger scraped against the trees, then sagged to the ground with a
mind-spoken mewl of pain. Noxy slid down his side, gasping as she
jostled her bruised arm. The branch had torn open her gray leather
coat and the quilted sleeve of the heavy shirt she wore underneath it,
but had only scraped her skin. Her knees went weak as she realized how
close a call she'd had.

The tornado began moving away.  She and Charger had come down on a
narrow dirt track through a patch of forest that lay between two apple
orchards.  The summer-green branches of the oaks and maples around
them still shook in the wind, but she and Charger were safe.  For now.

She took a shaky breath.  Aft and the other cloudherds would have seen
her come down.  They would come looking for her.  If they could.

Heavy hooves drummed on the road behind her. Half a dozen soldiers in
yellow coats galloped toward her on stocky black horses. She struggled
to her feet with a grimace.

The lead rider reined in a few paces away. "Are you all right?" he
asked, pulling down the black-and-yellow bandanna that protected his
mouth and nose from the wind-blown grit.

"I'm fine," Noxy said, cradling her bruised arm. "But my cloud has
been hurt. Did you see the others?"

"They went along west," the soldier said, pointing.  "Looks like they
all got by clear."

Another rider shouldered his horse past him.  "Noxy?" he asked
incredulously, his voice breaking. "Is that you?"

Noxy stared at the newcomer.  How did he know her name?

The rider pulled up his battle mask.  "Noxy---what are you doing
here?"

"Thokmay?"  Noxy stared at the prince of Gandan, cloud and arm both
momentarily forgotten.  "How---" And then the world spun around her
and she sagged back against her cloud.

"Noxy!" The prince leaped down from his horse. With three quick
strides he was beside her. He paid no attention to Charger edging away
nervously as he caught her by her good arm and helped her sit back
down on the hard-packed dirt track.

"I'm all right," Noxy protested, shaking him off weakly. "It's Charger
that's been hurt." She tried to struggle back to her feet, but the
prince put a hand on her shoulder to stop her.

"Just sit a moment," he said firmly. "Jinpa!"

"Honored?" one of the soldiers answered.

"That farm we passed," the prince said, pointing back along the
track. "See if you can get help."

"Honored!" the soldier replied. He snapped his horse's reins, only to
pull up sharply when Noxy said, "Wait!"

This time the prince didn't stop her from getting up. "The farm's
gone," she said. "The tornado tore it to pieces."

The prince's jaw tightened. "Manpa!" he barked, his voice breaking
again.  "You go with Jinpa. See if there are any survivors. Double
time!" The two soldiers galloped away.

The prince looked back at Noxy. "Well," he said in a gentler voice.
"It's good to see you again, but what are you doing *here*?  It's a
long way from Stale."

Noxy shrugged, then winced. This wasn't how she had imagined meeting
Prince Thokmay again, not at all. "We were on our way to Chaghan.  Aft
got a contract for some rain there---she's the mayor now---and Apple
Bridge was sort of on the way, and..."  She shrugged again to hide her
embarrassment.  She had wanted to surprise him...

Before the prince could reply, one of soldiers called out,
"Sir---above us!"  The other clouds had returned.

Aft brought her cloud down onto the road two dozen strides from
Charger and slid off while he was still settling. Like Noxy, he wore
his black hair in long braids, but his leather coat was fringed with
red and orange twists of ribbon.  His dark face was as narrow and as
fierce as a mountain hawk's.

He strode over to Charger without as much as glancing at Noxy, the
prince, or the soldiers and laid her hands on its flank.  "Sh, sh,
sh," he said soothingly as he closed her eyes to mind-speak with the
injured cloud.

Thokmay caught Noxy's eye and raised his eyebrows.  Noxy hesitated
before shaking her head slightly.  She still hadn't told anyone that
she could mind-talk to clouds without touching them.  The prince
nodded.

Aft gave Charger one last reassuring pat.  "He could have been torn to
shreds," he said to Noxy flatly. "And *you* could have been killed.
I'd never have heard the end of *that*."

"Yes, honored," Noxy said, eyes downcast.

"Don't you 'honored' me," Aft growled.  He turned to Prince Thokmay.
"I apologize, um, commander, if my companion here has caused you any
trouble. I'm sure we can take care of this now."

"Oh, it's no trouble," the prince said mildly, his voice cracking.
"But now that you're here, I was hoping Noxy and I would have a chance
to catch up."  He held the cloudherd's gaze, fourteen looking at
forty, for the half-dozen heartbeats it took the older man to realize
who he was.

As Aft opened her mouth to speak, the prince continued, "We were on
our way to escort the new consul from Chaghan into Apple Bridge when
we spotted the tornado.  I expect he'll have gone on ahead, but we
should get moving too in case it comes back."

Aft's eyes narrowed. "Come back?"  He hesitated before grudgingly
adding, "Honored?"

The prince nodded. "It's not just some monster out of the Blight. The
first attack was on a farmer who let us borrow his truffle pigs to
track some smugglers.  There have been two more since, all on people
who were trying to help us."

"I've never heard of anyone summoning a tornado," Aft said
skeptically. "How could back-country folk ever work magic like that?"

"They couldn't," the prince said, "But they can find it and use it.
That tornado probably came out of a bottle at the bottom of Fast Lake.
Some smuggler must have found it floating down the river.  It's just
our bad luck that---"

"Honored!" The soldiers who had gone down the road had come trotting
back. Two frightened boys in hand-me-down clothes were sitting behind
Jinpa, while an old woman rode behind Manpa.

The two boys stared wide-eyed at the nearby clouds while their
grandmother told her story.  Her son-in-law, it was his farm, she'd
moved in after the children were born, and they'd been out pruning,
her daughter and her husband that is, not the boys, and they'd seen
some men in the forest with a cart, and, well, everyone knew some
people had a little business now and again that other folk shouldn't
pry into, but these weren't anyone her son-in-law recognized, and
they'd talked about it and decided they ought to tell someone, and
they needed some new clothes for the boys, they were growing so fast,
so they'd gone into town that morning, and then that *thing* came out
of nowhere, and the boys had been so brave, but what was she going to
tell her daughter and her son-in-law about the cottage?  The roof was
gone, and the chicken coop, and the whole *barn*, and---

"The king will pay to have it all rebuilt," the prince told her
soothingly. "But right now, my men will see you safely into Apple
Bridge.  You can stay there until we find out who's behind this."

The old woman nodded, fighting tears.  The prince turned back to
Noxy. "You would be welcome in Apple Bridge as well, of course. You
and all your companions."

"That's impossible," Aft said sharply. "We've already lost half a day,
and if the tornado comes back like you said---"

"But Charger is hurt," Noxy protested. "She needs to rest for a few
days, or she'll never make it to Chaghan, much less back home."

"We can't afford dawdle around for a week," Aft snapped.  "Chaghan's
crops haven't seen rain in a month.."

"Well then, I'll stay here with Charger until he's better," Noxy
declared.

"Oh no you won't," Aft told her, glaring. "I'm not leaving one of my
riders out here in the middle of nowhere. Especially not one with your
talent for finding trouble!"

"I'm old enough to take care of myself!" Noxy said indignantly.

"Just like you took care of Charger?"

"I will take responsibility for her," the prince said, stepping
between the two.  "They can stay at the garrison house until they're
able to catch up with you."

Aft threw up his hands. "Like mother, like daughter," he said to
no-one in particular. "Do as you please---you always have.  Just
promise me you won't go looking for trouble."

"I never go *looking* for trouble," Noxy muttered, but Aft was already
climbing back onto his cloud. A few moments later he was airborne,
heading west with the rest of the herd.

The prince's carefully polite expression turned wistful as he watched
the clouds fly away. "Can you two make it to Apple Bridge?" he asked
Noxy.

She put her hand on Charger's flank and closed her eyes to mind-speak
with him before nodding. "Yes, if we go slowly. I've been pushing him
pretty hard to keep up with the others," she added, feeling a sudden
pang of guilt. "I think that's why we couldn't get away from the
tornado like they did."

The prince handed his horse's reins to Jinpa. "Put the lady and her
young men on Bucketbreath here," he ordered. "See them safely back to
Apple Bridge, and tell the staff that they're to be put up in the
garrison guest house if they can't find something more suitable.  I
will take the cloud back with Respected Noxious."

The soldier cleared his throat. "Um, honored, are you sure---"

"We'll all be safer if someone is in a position to spot the tornado
returning," the prince said crisply.

"Yes sir," Jinpa replied doggedly, "But---well, Sergeant Gyalpa said
to be double sure you were back along the garrison in time for the
dinner tonight.  With the new consul, sir.  It being protocol and
along like that."

The prince muttered something under his breath that Noxy was glad she
couldn't hear properly.  "The cloud won't be any slower than
horseback," he told Jinpa.  "And if I'm late, I'll tell the good
sergeant it was my fault."

"Yes sir," Jinpa said glumly.  He exchanged a look with Manpa.  It
wouldn't matter to the sergeant whose fault the prince said it was...

Prince Thokmay pointed at the two little boys.  "You two keep an eye
out as well," he said sternly. "If you see any sign of trouble, you
tell these men right away, all right?"

"Yes, honored," the older one said. His brother just stared wide-eyed
at the prince, the cloud, and the big wide world he'd suddenly found
himself in.

The prince pulled himself up onto Charger behind Noxy, then sat
quietly as she coaxed the injured cloud into the air. They levelled
off a hundred strides above the forest and turned toward Apple Bridge.

The soft, slightly damp feel of the cloud brought memories flooding
back to the prince. The last time he had flown had been two years
ago. A lot had changed since then, but not the exhiliration of being
able to see everything: the hackthorn bushes in their summer finery,
the apple orchards, a family of deer by a stream, a farmer shading his
eyes to look up at the cloud...

And there, in the distance, the Blight.  Centuries ago, the Pilots had
dumped their leftover magic there, from spells gone wrong to enchanted
creatures so dangerous that even the greatest magicians were afraid of
them.  At its center lay Fast Lake, where a year might pass for every
day in the normal world.  Around it, the land was---strange.  Some
parts were completely barren, while others were crowded with purple
trees whose limbs swayed in time to music no human being had ever
heard.  Chaghan lay on the far side, three days' hard ride for anyone
brave enough to cut across a few outlying patches of Blighted land, or
a week for those who didn't want to risk a stray gust of tainted wind
turning their eyes to flowers.

The prince jumped slightly when Noxy said, "You're pretty good at
giving orders these days."

The prince shrugged. "Thanks," he said, his voice breaking again. "But
Sergeant Gyalpa is really in charge.  You'll meet him when we get to
town. And Sergeant Dambu too---she's the troop's magician. Mostly I
just try to stay out of their way."

"Well, it sounded pretty convincing to me," Noxy said. She lowered her
voice half an octave. "'You two keep an eye out'. It reminded me of
Sergeant Dorbu."

The prince smiled and cleared his throat. "'I never go *looking* for
trouble'," he said in a falsetto voice.

"I don't sound like that!" Noxy said indignantly.

The prince laughed.  "No, but it's the closest I can come."  He
glanced down at the road again and settled himself a bit more
comfortably on the cloud. "How's your mother?"

It was Noxy's turn to shrug. "She's all right, I guess.  She's happy
to be herding again instead of running things."

The prince nodded. "Your letter said. I was surprised to hear she was
no longer mayor."

"A lot of people are still angry about what happened," Noxy said, her
eyes on the horizon.  "So when Aft said he was going to stand, there
wasn't even an election.  She says she's glad that someone else is
worrying about everything, but I think she misses it."

"I know how she feels," the prince said. "Things have been a lot
different for me too, but I'm actually glad to be out here, away from
all the fuss at court."

"Is Kulbinder here?" Noxy asked. "Your letter didn't say. It would be
good to see him again."

The prince shook his head. "He's with my brother now."

Noxy frowned. "Why? I thought he liked you."

The prince shrugged. "He probably does, but Lormay's the heir now."
He couldn't quite keep the bitterness out of his voice when he
continued, "My father said it would make it clear to everyone that
things have changed. Sending me to Apple Bridge is part of that
too. He said that since I'm never going to rule, I have to learn how
to serve."

"You didn't say anything about that in your letters," Noxy said
hesitantly.

The corner of the prince's mouth twisted into a half-smile. "I
couldn't be sure who was going to read them."

Noxy flushed. "I never showed them to anyone!" she protested. "Not
even my grandmother!"

"I don't mean that," the prince apologized hastily. "It's just that
some people at court thought they should keep an eye on me, at least
at first.  That's another reason I like being here---everyone isn't
watching everything I do and gossipping about everything I say."

"That's horrible!" Noxy exclaimed.

The prince shrugged again. "That's politics."

They rode in silence before the prince cleared his throat.  "And what
about... you know.  You can still head-talk to clouds from far away?"

"Mind-talk," Noxy corrected automatically.  "And yes, I can still do
it."  She closed her eyes and took a slow breath.  "I can still
mind-hear the cloud Aft is riding, and the rest of the herd too.  And
over there."  She pointed without opening her eyes.  "There are some
wild clouds over there somewhere."

"And you still haven't told anyone?"

Noxy shook her head.  "Only my granna."  The cloudherds had stories
about people who could mind-talk to clouds without touching them, none
of them with happy endings.

The prince waited another heartbeat for her to speak.  When she
didn't, he nodded.  "All right," he promised.  "Our secret."

----------------------------------------

## Chapter 2: Apple Bridge

The sun was sitting on the horizon like a fat yellow hen by the time
Apple Bridge came into view.  The town was home to twenty times as
many people as Stale, but seemed small to Noxy after some of the
cities she had flown over.

Most of the buildings were two or three stories tall. Their ground
floors were brick and their upper stories wooden, while their roofs
were shingled with long, skinny planks.  The smell of cooking rising
from their chimneys made Noxy's stomach rumble.

Most of Apple Bridge lay on the right bank of the Trout River.  Near
the center of town, where the river bent toward the distant sea, four
enormous stone pillars rose from the water.  Thick timber beams lay
atop them, and wide planks across those to create the bridge that gave
the town its name.

At the closer end of the bridge, a cobbled square was filled with
stalls being shuttered and wagons being loaded as the town's famous
Dog's Market began to close for the night.  A three-story figure eight
stood guard a few blocks away.

"That's the garrison house," the prince said.  "My sister and I live
upstairs in the north wing.  The judge stays there too when she's in
town.  The sergeants and stewards have the ground floor.  The rest is
storerooms and stables and the soldiers' quarters."

"And that's the dam?" Noxy pointed upriver where another four pillars
cast long shadows.  The wooden walkway strung between them was strong
enough to support the weigh of a dozen chain-link nets, but still
seemed fragile against the ancient stonework.  Sebastian the Great had
cast a spell on the nets a century ago to stop things from the Blight
floating downriver.  While the land downriver from them was lush and
green, only a few stunted brambles grew upstream.

The prince nodded. "The soldiers go up there every day to see what's
washed up.  Most of it is junk, but every once in a while..."  He
trailed off.

"It must be quite some spell to still be working after so long.
Ulfmaerr---" Noxy paused. "Ulfmaerr said magicians' spells usually
fade away when they do."  *Like he did,* she thought sadly.  The last
time he had come to Stale he had hardly been able to hold his own
spoon.  His eyes had been as bright as ever, but had darted from one
face to another as he tried to remember people's names. That had been
a year ago. No-one had seen him since.  No-one expected to.

The prince pretended not to notice the look on Noxy's face. "It's
lucky this one didn't," he said.  "The magician who was here before
Sergeant Dambu refreshed it a few years ago, but she said she could
never re-cast it if it failed."  He sighed. "And sooner or later it
*will* fail.  The only question is when."

"Cheerful as always," Noxy grumbled, punching his arm to make it a
joke and then wincing at the ache in her own.

They landed in the rear courtyard of the garrison house. A middle-aged
soldier with a bushy mustache stood waiting for them. He had two wide
yellow ribbons sewn onto his sleeve, deep wrinkles near the corners of
his eyes, shoulders that seemed as wide as he was tall, and no more
expression than a stone.

"Your Highness," he said, snapping a salute as the prince slid off
Charger.

"Sergeant Gyalpa," the prince acknowledged, wiping his hands on his
uniform before returning the salute.  "Allow me to present Probably
Noxious of Stale.  She will be staying with us until it is well
enough to travel again."

"Miss Noxious." The sergeant bowed formally.

"Please, just call me Noxy," she replied, bowing awkwardly in return.
She appreciated him keeping a straight face---she knew how odd
cloudherds' names sounded to lowlanders.  Even in the capital, people
had sniggered when Aft introduced herself as 'Disgusting Aftertaste'.
"We'll see who's laughing when the dragons hatch," Aft had said
darkly.  "We'll see if *their* names save *them* from being eaten."

"I take it the soldiers beat me back?" the prince said.

Sergeant Gyalpa nodded.  "Yes sir.  They said a farm was completely
destroyed.  The woman who survived said her son-in-law came along into
Apple Bridge today to report some suspicious men.  He left going on
about an hour.  I sent along out some riders, but he's not on the
road."

The prince frowned, trying to guess what the sergeant would think was
the right thing to do.  "They may have gone down the south road
instead of straight home," he ventured.  "Send another couple of
riders to look---it would be best if they didn't get home to find that
they no longer have one."

"Yes sir," the sergeant said approvingly. He lifted the silver whistle
that hung on a fine chain around his neck and blew two short notes
followed by two long ones.  A moment later a handful of soldiers came
trotting across the courtyard from various directions.

"Does the cloud need anything?" Prince Thokmay asked while the sergeant
gave the new arrivals their orders.

"Just water," Noxy said, rubbing her bruised arm.  "She'll be all
right as long as she gets some rest. But I could use a hot bath."

"Of course. I'll ask Dolly to see to it. She's my sister's nurse," he
added when Noxy raised her eyebrows. "She's used to helping people
with their baths."  He beckoned to a housemaid who had been hovering
nearby, then hesitated before adding, "It's really good to see you
again."

"You too," Noxy replied, her face warm despite the early evening
chill.

Prince Thokmay watched as the housemaid led Noxy away.  He should
probably take a bath before dinner too, he realized.  And find a clean
shirt.  And see if anyone knew the new Chaghan consul's name yet.  The
outgoing one, Yisu, had claimed not to know.  "Oh, they don't tell
*me* anything," she had said brightly the last time he had asked.

But instead of heading to his rooms, he clasped his hands behind his
back and closed his eyes, trying to imagine what it would be like to
mind-hear the way Noxy did.  A *clang* from the kitchen was someone
getting a pot down from its hook on the wall to make dinner.  A duller
*clonk, clonk, clonk* from the building behind him might be the smith
mending a sword or bending a horseshoe into shape.  The occasional
*thock!* and curse from the other courtyard was archery
practice---Sergeant Gyalpa had been scathing about the local standard
of marksmanship when they had first arrived, and his opinion hadn't
gone up much in the months since.

"Am I interrupting, Your Highness?" the sergeant asked from behind
him.

The prince jumped.  "Not really.  I meant to ask, any word from
Sergeant Dambu?"

"Yes sir," the sergeant said, studying Charger.  "She and her troop got
along back this afternoon.  They were gone six days, near as they can
figure."

"Six days?" The prince blinked. "They must have gone deeper into the
Blight than she planned."

"Yes sir," the sergeant nodded. "They found fresh tracks along by some
wash in the river.  She said they looked by a wagon or such."

"A wagon?  You think the smugglers are working that far in?" the
prince asked. Sergeant Gyalpa grunted noncommittally. "All right.
Tell her I'll speak with her in the morning.  In the morning," he
repeated as the sergeant opened his mouth.  "She needs a good night's
sleep, and I need a bath."

"Yes sir," Sergeant Gyalpa replied, his face as expressionless as
ever.

At that same moment, a few blocks away, a hairy, long-armed figure
slurped the last of his tea in a small shop on the edge of the Dog's
Market.  He was the shop's only customer---a few people had stuck
their heads in after he had taken a table, but all had decided to go
elsewhere.  The shop's tea blender glowered behind his counter, arms
folded.

"Ah... Delicious.  My compliments on your blend."  The hairy figure
stood, adjusted the glasses perched on his snub nose, and dropped a
few coppers on the table.  "I will *definitely* return."  Ignoring the
tea blender's muttered curse, he sauntered out into the waning
afternoon light.

The market was closing up for the night.  The merchants whose shops
stood on its perimeter folded down awnings and fastened shutters while
stallkeepers threw unsold vegetables onto two-wheeled scrap wagons or
stacked bales of wool into wagons to be taken back to warehouses.  A
handful of farmers interrupted their discussion of the day's barley
prices to stare at the troll as he waddled across the cobblestones.
"Good evening and good morrow," he said cheerfully, nodding to them
and continuing on without waiting for a reply that never came.

He had just reached the market gate when a piebald horse suddenly
whinnied and reared up on her hind legs.  "Hold still!"  barked the
burly man trying to harness her between his wagon's draw poles.
"Stupid creature!"  He slapped her hard across her nose.

The horse reared again, almost pulling her reins out of the farmer's
hands.  Rough-edged bricks spilled out of the back of the wagon.
Cursing, the man yanked drew a willow switch from his belt.  "I said
hold *still*!"  He raised his arm to whip the horse---

---and grunted in surprise as a hairy hand grasped his wrist.  "Now,
now," chided the troll.  "Let's just think on this for a moment, shall
we?  Do unto others, and all that."

"Let go of me, you filthy beast!"  The farmer tried to yank his arm
away, but the troll's grip was like iron.  "I said let go, or I'll
give *you* a whipping too!"

The troll smiled, revealing strong white teeth.  "I suggest you
reconsider.  And if your friend comes any closer with that cudgel, I'm
afraid I may have to take it away from him."  The man who had been
edging up behind the troll stopped short, but tightened his grip on
the stout length of hickory in his hands.

The market had gone silent around the threesome.  The troll let go of
the farmer and wiped his hand ostentatiously on his carefully-combed
pelt.  "There, you see?" he said cheerfully.  "Your horse has calmed
down.  It does usually only take a bit of patience.  Now, let me wish
you good evening and---"

A potato flew by his head.  A second one bounced off his arm.
Suddenly the air was full of eggs and stones and vegetables.  "Skin
him!" someone shouted.  "Skin him!"

The crowd took up the cry.  Suddenly bold, the farmer swung his
switch, then yelped in surprise as he flew through the air to crash
against a nearby stall.  The troll spun around just in time to catch
the cudgel swung at his head.  Another yelp was followed by another
crash as the troll threw the second man after the first.

The troll charged into the crowd.  People screamed, throwing
themselves out of his way as he leaped for the market gate.  He swung
himself up on top of it, leaped again for the nearest roof, and was
gone.

Meanwhile, Prince Thokmay had just closed the door to his room behind
him.  A clean dress shirt was waiting on his pillow, and his town
boots had been polished and set at the foot of his bed.  He shrugged
off his heavy uniform jacket and hung it on the tailor's dummy that
stood in the corner, then peeled off his shirt and tossed it into the
wicker pail under his bed.  With a quick glance to make sure no one
was watching, he stood in front of his mirror and looked at himself
critically.  His shoulders were definitely a bit broader than they had
been six months ago.  He wondered if Noxy had noticed.  He had
certainly noticed the way she had changed shape since he had last seen
her...

*Rap rap rap!* He jumped at the urgent knock on his window.  "Your
Highness!" panted a familiar voice.  "Might I enter?  I find myself in
rather a spot of trouble."

"Not again," the prince sighed.  He unlatched the window's
iron-and-bamboo shutter and opened the quartered glass pane, then
stepped back as a long-armed ball of hair and muscle swung itself into
his room.

"Thank you, Your Highness," his tutor puffed.  He stood and
straightened his glasses.  "May I suggest that it would perhaps be
prudent to re-bar my ingress, so as not to betray my route to passers
by?  Some of whom might regrettably be in rather foul moods?"

"If you mean close the window so people don't know which way you came,
certainly," the prince said, shaking his head as he did just that.
"So what happened *this* time?"

The troll laid his hand on his chest and blinked innocently.  "I
merely attempted to give one of your loyal citizens a lesson on proper
care of their fellow creatures."

"In other words, you were arguing with someone about their animals?"
The prince shook his head again.  "Mope, you have to stop doing this."

"I'll stop when they do," the troll said, the humor suddenly gone from
his voice.  "He was whipping the poor creature, Your Highness.
Whipping her!"

"Was she Gifted?"

"That's irrelevant!"  The prince's tutor waved an arm to emphasize his
point.  "And it was hardly her fault she was being skittish---some
idiot flew a cloud right over the town this afternoon and scared us
all half out of our wits, man and beast.  *That's* who deserves a
whipping!"

"Ah."  The prince coughed.  "About that..."

It took him several minutes, a promise to think more carefully, and
finally a raised voice to shoo his tutor out of his room so that he
could finish dressing.  As he struggled with the laces at his cuffs,
he studied at the family portrait that hung next to his door.

His father stood in the center in a richly embroidered uniform with
the gold-and-turquoise collar of Gandan securely around his neck and
his second wife, in a matching jacket and long flowing trousers,
beside him.  His youngest son, Prince Thokmay, stood in front of the
king wearing a copy of the royal collar to show the world that he was
the heir.  Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin stood to either side,
hands clasped behind their backs.  Two years ago, Thokmay and Thokmin's
positions had been reversed.  He wondered if his brother thought about
that as often as he did.

## Chapter 3: Familiar Faces

*He could have told me that his sister's nurse was going to watch,*
Noxy thought as she lowered herself self-consciously into the steaming
water.

"Warm enough, miss?" Dolly asked as she stirred the coals in the tub's
hotbox.  Her head only came up to Noxy's shoulders, but her arms were
longer than Noxy's legs. Her orange-brown fur was speckled with gray,
and her eyes were sad and wise.

"Yes, thank you," Noxy said. "It's wonderful."  It was actually almost
too hot to bear, but she could feel the ache in her shoulder start to
melt away.

Dolly smiled. "I'm sure it is, after all you've been through. Now, let
me have a look at that arm of yours. No, please, don't try to get up,
just sit forward a bit. That's good... that's good... My, that *is* a
nasty bruise, isn't it? You're lucky you didn't break your shoulder.
Does it hurt when I---I'm sorry. Are you all right? How about this
way?"  She clucked her tongue, then went over to the cabinet next to
the window and rummaged around. "I'm *sure* I've got some left," she
said to herself.

Noxy looked around the room as the troll sniffed the contents of
various jars and bottles. The walls were painted a soft yellow. The
cabinet, a standing mirror, and a chair and matching stool were darkly
varnished wood, with legs that curved inward slightly like a bowlegged
sailor's. The only other decoration was a framed needlepoint of an
eagle atop a pole with its wings spread. Noxy wondered idly if it was
landing or taking off, or just shaking off the rain.

"That's Her Highness's work," Dolly said, noticing Noxy's gaze. "She's
a fine one with a needle."

Noxy hesitated. "The prince told me she was..."  She trailed off, not
knowing exactly what to say.

"Simple?" Dolly finished, undisturbed. "She is that.  But as sweet as
a ripe apple, as they say hereabouts. Now lean forward again and let
me put some of this on you. It won't hurt.  Pilots know I've done it
often enough for Her Highness---it's a rare week she doesn't have some
spill or other."

Noxy was thankful that Dolly left her alone to dress in a pale yellow
blouse and gray floor-length skirt that a housemaid had delivered
while she was soaking. The skirt felt drafty---mountain women only
wore them for weddings, funerals, and naming day parties---but when
she wiped steam from the mirror to look at herself, the clothes' soft
colors made her dark brown skin gleam like the furniture.

She dithered for a moment before setting aside the dainty wooden court
shoes that had come with the clothes. *No sense breaking my neck on
the stairs,* she told herself as she pulled on her sturdy mountain
boots instead.  After tying her braids back in a thick club, she set
out to see what she could find to quiet her grumbling stomach.

The dining room on the ground floor had the largest window Noxy had
ever seen.  A double dozen people could have seated themselves at the
table that stood in front of it, even given the room needed for the
bewildering confusion of cutlery laid at each place.

"Good evening, respected," the prince said solemnly, bowing.  Noxy
hesitated, not knowing if she was supposed to bow back, but then
Thokmay winked.

She scowled to hide her blush.  "You're a beast, you know that?"

"I believe you have just been complimented, Your Highness," said a
voice behind her.  Noxy spun around.

The troll who had just entered the room sketched an elaborate court
bow.  A small pair of glasses with heavy brass rims perched
precariously on his tiny snub of a nose. His orange jacket was just a
shade lighter than his fur, while his brown pants were just a shade
darker.

"Ahem.  Um, Probably Noxious of Stale, allow me to present my
tutor, the Learned Mope."

"A pleasure to meet you, respected---the prince has spoken of you
often,"  the troll said, smiling pleasantly.

"Learned Mope is Dolly's son," Prince Thokmay explained to Noxy. "He's
supposed to be teaching me law and history."

"He's actually not a bad student," the troll told Noxy in a stage
whisper. "He has a fine memory. He just don't know how to think
yet. Logic!  Logic is the key." He waggled a finger.  "Logic and
eloquence.  And facts, of course.  One must have facts as fuel for
one's arguments..."

Noxy tried to seem interested as the troll embarked on a long story
about how an inspired bit of logic by someone she had never heard of
had once prevented a battle between two countries she was pretty sure
no longer existed.  It became harder after the steward stole the
prince away with an urgent question about salad dressings and the
placement of lanterns.

As Mope's lecture approached its climax, another figure slipped into
the room and made a beeline for the dinner table.  Her skin was the
same tea brown as the prince's, but instead of being cropped close,
her hair hung in a dozen long braids, each ending in a small yellow
bow.

The troll noticed her glance. "You've met Her Highness, I trust?"  he
asked, interrupting himself.

"I'm afraid I haven't," Noxy replied, trying to imitate the polite
voice her mother used when negotiating contracts. It seemed to fit
with the delicately-carved chairs and her light-as-feathers skirt.

"Well, no point standing on ceremony," Mope said, shooing her
forward. "Your Highness?"

The princess shook her head as they approached, counting slowly.
"Four, five, six---there are six people for dinner tonight!" she
announced proudly.

The troll straightened his glasses.  "Quite possibly, Your Highness,
though logically the most we can conclude is that there will be *at
most* six people.  But no matter, no matter," he added hastily as she
frowned.  "Have you met Respected Noxious? She's a friend of your
brother."

"H'lo," the princess mumbled, suddenly shy.

"Hello, Your Highness," Noxy said. The silence stretched awkwardly.
As Mope opened his mouth to break it, Noxy asked, "Do you always wear
nice shoes?"

Princess Ogmin looked at her feet. Her wooden court shoes were dark
blue with golden roses chasing one another across the top. "No?"
Princess Ogmin said, still shy.

"Me neither," Noxy told her. She tugged her skirt up to reveal the
toes of her scuffed mountain boots. "I was afraid I'd trip and fall
down the stairs if I wore nice shoes, so I wore these instead."

The princess's eyes widened. She giggled. "Look!" she whispered loudly
to Mope, pointing.  "She's wearing *boots*!"

The troll grinned. "Yes she is," he agreed.  "And very nice boots they
are, wouldn't you say?"

After that, Princess Ogmin couldn't stop talking. By the time Sergeant
Gyalpa arrived to rescue the prince from the steward, she had told
Noxy about her riding boots, her dolls, and the needlework she was
making for her brother's birthday. ("But don't tell him," Princess
Ogmin whispered, "It's a secret.")

The steward returned a few moment later to announce that the Consul of
Chaghan had arrived with her replacement, and was begging the prince's
grace to join the court for dinner.  "The court?"  Noxy asked in a
whisper after Mope excused himself.

The prince gestured at his sister, who had gone shy again as soon as
the steward spoke.  "Whenever two members of the royal family are in
the same place, it's a court."

"Her Excellence, Yisu Chaghan-o Consul," the steward said loudly.
Noxy glanced at the door.  Her blood instantly went cold.

"It can't be..." she whispered.  She grabbed the prince's arm.
"Thokmay... look!"  The prince looked where she was pointing.  The
smile dropped off his face like a hanged man dropping from a gallows.

"Your Highness!"  The portly woman striding toward them with a
practiced smile on her face wore a formal black coat trimmed in
Chaghan's sky blue, held closed by a matching sash.  Her smile
faltered slightly when she realized the prince was ignoring her.
"Is something wrong?"

"What---what in the name of all things rotten is *he* doing here?" the
prince demanded, his voice breaking.

The room seemed to still as the man who had entered two paces behind
the consul bowed deeply.  "Your Highness.  How good to see you again."
Prince Shudarga straightened and turned to Noxy.  "And you as well,
Respected Noxious.  I trust you are well."

"I---I take it you've met?" Consul Yisu asked weakly, her eyes darting
back and forth between the two princes like a rabbit caught between
two lions.

"Yes," Prince Thokmay grated. "He murdered a friend of mine."

Prince Shudarga coughed.  "Not that I wish to begin my tenure as
consul by disagreeing with my host, but Sergeant Dorbu's death was not
murder."

"Not murder!?"  "Consul!?"  Noxy and Prince Thokmay exclaimed at the
same time.

"How can you be consul? You're not Chaghan-o!" the prince continued.

"I am now," Prince Shudarga replied calmly.  "The Chaghan-o very
graciously allowed me to take up land there after your father seized
my holdings in Gandan.  When Consul Yisu decided to retire, offering
my services as her replacement seemed the least I could do to thank
them."

If Noxy had been raised at court like Prince Thokmay, she might have
noticed the angry look that briefly flitted across Consul Yisu's face
when Prince Shudarga said she had decided to retire.  As it was, she
was too angry to notice anything, not even the way Manpa and Jinpa had
slipped into the room to stand casually by the door, very definitely
*not* ready to draw their swords at the first hint of trouble.

"The least you could do?" the prince snarled.  "The least you could do
is find a cliff like the one you threw Sergeant Dorbu off and take a
flying leap!"

Prince Shudarga sighed theatrically.  "I did not throw the sergeant
off anything, Your Highness.  We were fighting.  It was difficult
terrain, and he fell.  I'm sorry it happened.  I'm sorry for every
single person or Gifted beast that died that day."

"Sorry enough to come back to Stale for trial?" Noxy burst out.

Prince Shudarga shook his head.  "I very much doubt I would receive a
fair hearing if I did so."

"A fair---you don't deserve any kind of hearing!  Let *go* of me!"
Noxy shook off the hand Prince Thokmay had put on her arm.

"Noxy!" the prince said sharply.  He held up the cream-colored sheet
of paper that Consul Yisu had handed to the steward, who had in turn
passed it to Prince Thokmay.  "Noxy, I'm sorry, but he's telling the
truth.  He really is the new consul."

Noxy stared at him incredulously.  "But---he killed Sergeant Dorbu!"

The prince nodded, his face years older than it had been just minutes
ago.  "I know he did.  But as long as he's officially a guest of the
king, Gandan-o law can't touch him."

"Thank you, Your Highness."  Prince Shudarga's hair was starting to
gray, Noxy noticed, and he was thinner than he had been two years ago.
She hoped it was more than just age.  She hoped those two years had
been as hard for him as they'd been for Fernando, whose broken leg had
healed crookedly, or for Ulfmaerr, who had given up so much of himself
to help her and Prince Thokmay escape.  She hoped he had nightmares,
like she sometimes still did.

From his post beside the table, the steward rang a small bell.
"Dinner is served," he announced.

Prince Thokmay didn't move.  "My apologies, Respected Yisu," he said,
"But I find I am suddenly feeling unwell.  I don't think I would be
able to make it through dinner."

"Of course, Your Highness," the Chaghan-o replied, "I completely
understand.  Perhaps I could come and bid you farewell before I
depart?"

"It would be my pleasure."  She and Prince Thokmay bowed to each other.

"And I trust you will enjoy your stay in Apple Bridge, *Consul*,"
Thokmay said to his other guest in a voice as cold as a mountain lake.

Prince Shudarga inclined his head.  "I hope so, Your Highness.  I
sincerely hope so."

Sergeant Gyalpa had been standing at attention near one end of the
dinner table throughout the exchange.  The moment the door closed
behind the two visitors and the apologetic steward, he took a deep
breath and blew it out through his mustache.  "Sir, if I may---"

"You may not," Prince Thokmay snapped.

"But sir, I---"

The prince rounded on him.  "That man killed my friend!" he shouted,
angry tears welling in his eyes.  "He terrorized Noxy's village, and
more than that, he raised rebellion against my father.  What is
Chaghan thinking!?  It is an insult for them to appoint him as
consul!"

"Yes sir," Sergeant Gyalpa said steadily.  "That's what I was going to
say, sir.  It's an insult, and not an accidental one, and if I may,
sir, I think you handled it very well."

The prince blinked, nonplussed.  "Um.  Yes.  Thank you, sergeant."

Princess Ogmin eventually broke the silence that followed.  "Are we
still going to have pie?" she asked hesitantly, then look startled
when everyone laughed.

In the end they agreed it would be a shame to waste the kitchen's hard
work, and Prince Thokmay declared that he was feeling much better.  The
house staff served spicy squash soup and skewers crowded with grilled
vegetables and salty cubes of cheese.  The pie that followed was
delicious.

Afterward, Prince Thokmay sent his sister gently off to bed.  "Would
you like to sit on the balcony for a bit?"  he asked Noxy once she was
gone.  "I'm sure the cook would be happy to mull some cider."

The balcony turned out to be as wide as the house Noxy shared with her
mother back in Stale. The Trout River stretched away to the left
and the right, up toward the magic dam and down through Gandan and
Latter Tongsa to the sea.  Moonlight gleamed on each little ripple,
and suddenly Noxy missed the million sharp stars of the mountain sky.

A bell went *dong, dong, dong* slowly somewhere on the other side of
the river.  "Third watch," the prince observed, sliding a little lower
in his chair.  "Sergeant Gyalpa had me do night watches when we first
got here, just so I'd know what it was like for the soldiers.  It was
actually kind of fun---turns out it's a lot easier getting up in the
middle of the night than getting out of bed in the morning."

"We take turns sleeping when we're on long flights," Noxy told him.
"As long as a couple of people are awake to keep the herd moving, the
rest will follow."

"Are you enjoying it?" Thokmay asked.

Noxy smiled.  "Lots."  She hesitated.  "And---how about you?  Are you
enjoying... this?"

The prince raised his mug to his lips, then lowered it without
drinking.  "Actually, after I got back to Gandan, I thought for a
while about becoming a doctor."

"A doctor?" Noxy said. "But---you're a boy!"

"Boys can be doctors," the prince said defensively.  "Anyway, my
father said that one more doctor more or less probably wouldn't make
much difference in the world.  So here I am, learning how to command
soldiers and argue the law."

"Do you ever regret what you did?" Noxy asked. She'd wanted to ask in
her letters, but had never known how to.

"No, not really." He sounded distant, as if they were talking about
someone he had lost touch with long ago. "It needed to be done. That's
really all there is to it.  But I think it's hard for Ogmin. She's
not... she's not very good with things changing. The first month we
were here, she had to sleep in my room. She kept waking up in the
middle of the night because she couldn't hear the bell in Queen
Zhimi's Tower ringing."

"But why is she here? Isn't it dangerous?"

"It needed to be done," the prince said again. "If you send one royal
away, it looks like exile.  Send two, and you can call it a court."

"But---"

"My father *says* that her presence is a sign of the trust he puts in
his oldest son. I wonder sometimes, though." The prince drained his
cider. "I don't feel---I don't feel like I'm ready for that kind of
trust, not really."

Noxy was silent. Finally Prince Thokmay sighed. "I'm sorry. It's
been a long day, and I still have a letter to write. Do you really
want to go to the Dog Market with Ogmin tomorrow? You don't have to if
you don't want to."

"Oh, I think we'll have fun," Noxy said. "I just hope Dolly can
keep up with us."  She drained the last of her cider and stood.

The prince hurriedly stood as well.  They looked at each other,
neither quite knowing what to do next, until the prince cleared his
throat.  "So, good night."

"Good night," Noxy said awkwardly.  Her breath caught when the prince
reached out, but he was only opening the door to let her back into the
garrison house.  "Good night," she repeated, turning and leaving him
on the balcony with all the moment's might-have-beens.

*Meanwhile, on the other side of the garrison house, a hairy hand
unlatched a window.  Its owner waited a moment to see if anyone had
noticed, but only heard the usual sounds of servants finishing
late-night chores, soldiers gossipping as they stood watch, and a cat
meowing to be let in.*

*Climbing onto the roof took only a moment.  A long leap ending in a
practiced reach and flip, and the troll was across the street and
away...*

*A few minutes later, a piebald horse was awakened by a gentle hand
stroking her flank. "Sh, sh," whispered a voice. "Oh, look what
they've done to you." Enraged and embarrassed after the scene in the
market, her owner had laid into her flanks with his willow switch,
leaving a double dozen angry welts.*

*She whinnied softly as her midnight visitor slipped a halter over her
head. "Sh, sh...  Quietly now, come along."  She followed obediently
as the troll led her out of the stable behind the inn where her
bruised master had found a room for the night.*

*The inn's yard was empty, though voices could be heard from inside.
Only the stars, the scarred moon, and an attentive crow watched the
pair make their way across the inn's little courtyard to a muddy
alley.*

*As they reached it, the crow swooped low over their heads.  The horse
side-stepped, startled.  "Sorry!" the crow squawked.*

*"Sh!" the troll hissed.*

*"Sorry," the crow repeated more quietly.  "There's a couple of
night-soil collectors along down Trumpet Street, but that's all."*

*"Thank you." The crow bobbed its head and took wing again, fluttering
from building to building as the troll and the horse picked their way
through the alley to a run-down warehouse on the banks of the Trout.*

*The carefully-oiled hinges of the warehouse's door made no more sound
than the window latch had.  Inside, a cheap dayglass lantern cast just
enough reddish-orange light to reveal a pair of raccoons and---*

*The horse shied again as the bear rose to its feet and ambled toward
her.  "Sh, sh, sh..."  The troll stroked her muzzle.  "It's all right,
it's all right, nobody's going to hurt you, not here, not ever."*

*"You know she doesn't understand you," the bear rumbled.*

*"She understands what I mean," the troll replied sharply.  "The barge
is still coming in tomorrow?"*

*"If it hasn't sunk.  Or been pirated.  Or caught fire."  The bear
stepped aside to let the troll lead the horse to the back of the
warehouse where half a bag of pilfered oats waited for her.  The
raccoons stood on their hind legs and pushed the door closed.*

*The troll stroked the horse's muzzle one last time.  "Don't worry.
No one is ever going to put a halter on you again."  Without waiting
for an answer that would never come, the hairy figure climbed a post,
swung along a beam, and disappeared out a window into the night.  The
air was chill, and morning would arrive all too soon, but there was
one more chore to be done...*

As the crow tucked its head under its wing on a rafter above the
horse, Prince Thokmay was sitting down at his desk.  He had unbuttoned
his dress jacket but kept it on for warmth---the light from the little
dayglass lantern by his elbow was midday-yellow, but held no heat at
all.

He frowned at the sheet of paper before him.  *Your Majesty,* his
letter began, as his reports to his father always did. *1.  Apple
Bridge continues quiet. The Dog Market is busy, but your revenue
collectors report only minor disputes and disturbances.* He saw no
reason to mention Mope's latest run-in with the locals.

*2. The tornado has struck again. No soldiers' lives were lost, but
one man is still missing, and a prosperous smallholding was destroyed.
There is still no clue who is directing it.* The prince had hesitated
before calling the little out-of-the-way farm "prosperous". He didn't
think that his father's hawk-eyed accountants would quibble over the
shells that the prince was planning to spend to rebuild it, but Mope
always told him to think two moves ahead.

*3. A Stale cloud was injured in the same attack. Its rider is to
remain here with it until it is able to rejoin its herd.* He had
almost chewed the end off his quill writing those two sentences.
After what had happened two years ago, he doubted his father would be
happy knowing that Noxy was staying at the garrison house.  He wanted
his brother to find out even less. The first time Noxy had written
Thokmay a letter, Thokmay had run through the palace holding it in the
air, crowing, "Thokmay has a sweetheart!  Thokmay has a sweetheart!"
The older prince had knocked over a potted lime tree and two elderly
surveyors catching up with him, and had his riding privileges taken
away for a week for blacking his eye. Thokmay had made a point of
sneering at cloudherds ever since.

He sighed, then froze as something else sighed behind him.  His right
hand was on the writing desk, holding the goose quill.  *Breathe
naturally,* he told himself as he slid his left hand up from his knee
(which he often scratched while writing) to the dagger at his
belt. Slowly, slooowwwllyyy...

Something thumped onto the floor behind him.  The prince leaped to his
feet, knocking over his chair as he drew his dagger.  The ghost of a
small dog looked at him for a moment, then threw back his head and
howled.

The sound went through the prince like an arrow. He clapped his hands
over his ears, nearly taking off his nose with his dagger as the
lantern on his desk shattered.

The ghost lowered its head and growled, ears back. The prince yelped
and slashed instinctively as the apparition suddenly charged. His
whole body went cold for an instant as the ghost passed through him
and disappeared through the wall.

The prince collapsed onto the edge of his desk, shivering
uncontrollably.  His dagger slipped from his numb fingers and
clattered on the floor.

The door burst open a moment later. "Your Highness!"  Someone shook
him. "Your Highness, are you all right?"

"I'm fine," Prince Thokmay mumbled. He let out his breath with a
whoosh, half-expecting to see it make a fog. "It was Edward. He was
here."

"Pilots preserve us."  The servant let go of the prince's shoulders.
Was his name Apsu? The prince couldn't remember, though he prided
himself on knowing names.  He was so... tired...

More boots pounded the planked stone corridor. "Your Highness, are you
all right?"  Sergeant Dambu asked before pulling herself up short and
sniffing the air. "There's been a ghost here," she said flatly.

The prince nodded. "I know," he mumbled, still shivering.
Disconnected thoughts and images were surfacing in his mind like
drowned bodies rising to the surface of a stagnant pond.  He choked
back nausea.  "I think---I think he's trying to warn us about
something."

"About what, Your Highness?"  *Abasu,* the prince recalled fuzzily.
*The servant's name is Abasu.* He shook his head.  The images---they
weren't his memories, they were the ghost's, and they were all the
wrong shape and size and flavor.  Thinking about them was like trying
to choke down cold cauliflower soup...

"Make way."  Sergeant Gyalpa pushed past the servants.  He was wearing
only his boots and a striped cotton nightshirt, but had his sword in
his hand. "Your Highness, are you---"

"It was Edward," Sergeant Dambu told him.  "He passed along through
His Highness."  She picked up a shard of dayglass from the desk and
turned it over in her hand.  "He's getting stronger."

Sergeant Gyalpa scowled. "Back to your posts," he ordered the servants
and soldiers. "Nothing more is going to happen here tonight."

He waited until they were gone before putting his hand on the prince's
shoulder.  "If you need to yark, lad, go ahead.  Most do, their first
time along this sort."

Prince Thokmay shook his head, feeling merely dizzy instead of seasick.
The thoughts the ghost had left behind in his head were fading.  "I
think..." He swallowed.  "It's something about the bridge.  Or the
dam.  And the Blight.  Something bad is coming."  He stood, then
grabbed the desk with one hand to steady himself.  "Something *really*
bad."

"Omens blasted omens," Sergeant Gyalpa cursed. "Why can't he just come
along and tell us straight?"

"I'm so more worried as that he's coming clearer instead of fading,"
Sergeant Dambu said, still turning the shard of dayglass over in her
hand.  Her voice, soft and husky, seemed at odds with her skinny
frame.  "Should have moved along ages since, before we were either
born.  Why's he coming stronger?  And how?"

Prince Thokmay straightened up. "Whatever is giving him the strength to
stay in this world can't bode well for this town. I'll include a note
to my father's magicians in my letter and ask for advice." He took a
deep breath and let it out with a whoosh. "I'll do that now.  It's not
like I'm going to get to sleep any time soon.  And Sergeant
Dambu---let's speak first thing in the morning.  It appears we have
more to talk about than just what you found on your last patrol." He
returned the two sergeants' salutes and good nights, swept the
still-glowing dayglass into a pile in the corner of his desk, and fell
back into his chair.

He could feel the long day dragging down his eyelids as he added a
scribbled summary of what had happened to his letter and signed, *Your
dutiful son, Thokmay Gandan-o Prince* below it.  He knew he should
re-read it, but instead he drew a line diagonally across the empty
space at the bottom of the page, folded it into thirds, stumbled to
his bed, kicked off his boots, and was asleep by his third breath.

## Chapter 4: A Visit to the Market

The prince woke at dawn, still in his clothes, and groaned.  He'd had
a restless night---when Edward the Dog's memories hadn't been burbling
in his head like a bad bean casserole, Prince Shudarga's calm smile
had mocked him.  Gandan's relations with its neighbor had been shaped
by half a dozen royal marriages, almost as many border wars, and the
ever-present headache of the Blight.  Sergeant Gyalpa was right:
choosing a rebel who had almost toppled the throne as consul was a
deliberate insult, but why?  Why now?  And why Apple Bridge?  Not for
the first time, he wished someone who actually knew what they were
doing was there to help him figure out what to do.

He spent five minutes brushing the taste of dinner off his teeth
before settling back at his desk.  Almost immediately, someone knocked
on the door to his suite.  "Enter," he said loudly.

Sergeant Dambu closed the door behind her and saluted.  "Your
Highness," she said, eyes downcast.

"Sergeant." Prince Thokmay gestured at stool next to his desk.  "Thank
you for coming so quickly last night.  Any further thoughts on why
Edward keeps bothering us?"

"No, Your Highness," she said, still standing.  She looked thin, the
prince thought, but she always had.  "Most only I know along ghosts is
putting them to rest.  Best be to ask along His Majesty's in the
capital, see by any there can make advice."

"Of course---it's in today's letter.  Now, Sergeant Gyalpa tells me
you went further into the Blight than planned?"

The garrison's magician nodded.  "Yes, Your Highness.  We found tracks
along by where the trees are all done to glass.  Half a dozen horses,
I'd count, well shod, and them drawing a cart.  I figured I'd best go
on to see by where the led."

"Could it have been a patrol from Chaghan?"

Sergeant Dambu hesitated.  "Not much likely, Your Highness," she said
after a moment.  "If they were going to come along this far, they
would have done with more trouble of themselves."

"I suppose so." He scribbled a note. "I'll have the guards in the Dog
Market keep an eye out for anyone selling souvenirs for the next few
days.  What about the nest?  Was it still burning?"

"Yes, Your Highness, although we saw something less of smoke than we
did time gone."

"Hm. Maybe whatever was in those eggs is finally done."  The nest in
question had appeared one night on a farm on the edge of the Blight.
In it, the farmer and her wife had found four mottled eggs the size of
pumpkins. If they had obeyed the law and called in soldiers, they
might still be alive. Instead, afraid that their land might be judged
Blighted, they had taken a hammer to one of the eggs.  The explosion
had woken the neighbors, and the choking smoke had made the southern
road into Apple Bridge impassable for months.

That had been ten years ago. The fire was still burning.

"Was there anything else?" the prince asked.  When Sergeant Dambu
shook her head, he made another note. "All right, put it in the log."

"Yes, Your Highness. Will that be all?"

"Almost. Our guest last night---Prince Shidargu." He paused a moment,
searching for words.  "He's up to something.  I don't know what, not
yet, but he's here for a reason, and I want to know what it is.
Anything you can do to help find out?"

The sergeant hesitated a moment before replying.  "Could try to listen
in from away, Your Highness, but I'd need be told who he'd most
soonest kiss to make that one work.  And..."  She shrugged slightly.
"Don't have in me but to make that do once or twice more."

The prince nodded.  "Then let's save that one for 'in case'."  Every
time a magician bent the universe out of shape, they had to give up
some part of themselves to pay for it.  Whether it was going blind to
call a storm, or being unable to sleep under the same roof twice in
exchange for healing a sick child, there was always a price.

"Thank you, Your Highness," Sergeant Dambu said. She hadn't looked
directly at him the whole time she had been in the room.  He suspected
that she never would, not unless she was willing to let some magic she
had worked long ago fail.  But that wasn't the sort of thing you asked
a magician, not even if you were a prince, so he just returned her
salute and turned back to the papers on his desk.

Meanwhile, a few corridors away, Noxy was wiping cold water off her
face.  *They could have told me that 'first thing' meant six o'clock
in the morning,* she grumbled to herself. Dolly hadn't actually
apologized for waking Noxy up so early---you probably weren't supposed
to apologize for doing what royalty asked you to---but she had looked
sympathetic as Noxy braided her hair and pulled on the dark pants and
warm patterned sweater the troll had brought.  The house staff were
apparently still trying to repair her coat where the flying branch had
torn it.  She suspected it would look better than new by the time she
saw it again.

"You have your boots on!" Princess Ogmin exclaimed when Noxy reached
the courtyard.

Noxy couldn't help but smile. "Yes I do. And I have a hole in my
stomach.  Shall we go and get some breakfast?"

Princess Ogmin took Noxy's arm and chattered happily as she half-led,
half-dragged the cloudherd through the waking streets.  Shopkeepers
were opening their shutters and sweeping their stoops.  They smiled
and bowed their heads as the princess passed by, but more than once
Noxy saw their smiles turn to scowls as they caught sight of Dolly.

The troll didn't seem to notice their looks.  *Or maybe she just
doesn't let it show,* Noxy thought.  When the princess darted off to
coo over a tray of wooden prayer bells, Noxy slowed down and fell in
step beside the troll.  "She's quite a handful," Noxy said.

"Oh, you get used to it," Dolly replied, smiling. "Reminds me of my
husband sometimes."

"Is he here in Apple Bridge?"

Dolly's smile slipped. "No, he passed away years ago. He wasn't
Gifted, but he was as sweet as a ripe apple." Her smile turned
wistful. "Having a husband and a little one to look after was plenty
of training for Her Highness."

Feeling awkward at Dolly's tone, Noxy gestured at the princess.  "Is
she always this happy?"

"Oh no, not at all. When His Highness is away, she frets something
terrible. And the first few weeks we were here, oh, I couldn't get her
out of the house, especially if there was any kind of commotion."  The
troll shook her head.  "She does well these days when she
concentrates, but everything goes to pieces in her head if people
start shouting."

The princess had lost interest in the prayer bells and moved on to a
shop selling brightly-dyed scarves from Ini Bantang, each one twice as
long as she was tall.  The shopkeeper was trying to show her how to
wrap one around her arms and body.  The frown of concentration on her
face was almost painful to see.

"And..."  Noxy hesitated.  "Has she always been...?"

"Simple?" Dolly supplied gently.  "Yes.  It took a while for people to
realize it, and when they did, well..."  The troll shrugged.  "Animals
are used to having ungifted kin, but it's hard for humans.  The king
especially---she was his first-born, and parents always love their
first something fierce."

They eventually disentangled the princess and continued on to the
market square.  Farmers were setting out baskets of apples and onions,
a Hett tinsmith was stoking the coals in his tiny portable forge, a
pair of kite makers were squabbling over which of their wares to hang
up, and a tailor was showing a new bolt of cloth to the portrait
painter beside her.  Noxy felt a sudden pang of homesickness---it was
Yellowsday, which meant it would be market day back home in Stale
too.  It wouldn't be nearly as large---why, the whole village would
practically fit inside the Dog Market---but it would have the same
feeling about it, the same sense that if you turned the right corner
or looked in the bottom of the right basket, you might find anything.

"Beaver tails!" Princess Ogmin squealed, yanking Noxy's arm. The smell
of the crispy sugar-coated pancakes crept into Noxy's nostrils like an
old cat climbing into a warm bed, making her stomach rumble.

The baker bowed to the princess, then bowed again when she introduced
Noxy as "my friend who can fly".  Making a fist, he stuck two long
skewers between his fingers and then speared a beaver tail and
dribbled some cinnamon on it. "More please!" Princess Ogmin said,
clapping her hands. The baker shook on more, only stopping when Dolly
said, "It's supposed to be a bit of cinnamon with breakfast, Your
Highness, not a bit of breakfast with cinnamon."

He handed the skewered beaver tail to the princess, then quickly made
up two more for Noxy and Dolly. The trio stood beside his stall,
eating their way around the skewers so that they wouldn't get the
sticky glaze on their hands. As they did so, a woman stepped out of a
shop opposite them and began to take apart the shutters on its
windows.

"What' 'e doing?" Princess Ogmin asked around a mouthful of beaver
tail.

The baker grinned. "Ah, she's got ambitions, she has, Your Highness."

The princess swallowed.  "Is that dangerous?" she asked anxiously.

The baker laughed. "Can be, Your Highness, can be, but I don't think
you need to worry along this one. Jokhang! Her Highness is wondering
what you're about!"

The woman stopped banging. "I'm putting in a proper glass window, Your
Highness, if you please," she said. "So folks will be able to see such
as I've got along by they go past my door. It has to be good for
business, I reckon."

Noxy had seen glass windows in shops in the capital.  She thought they
were beautiful, but Aft had sniffed and said that any merchant who
trusted something that breakable to keep out thieves wouldn't be in
business for long.

Princess Ogmin frowned.  "I don't understand," she whispered.

"Don't worry, dear," the troll said, patting her arm.  "We'll come
back in a few days and you'll see.  Now, do you want some tea?"

They spent the next half hour wandering.  Noxy wasn't surprised that
everyone seemed to know the princess.  What did surprise her was the
scowls and glares directed at Dolly whenever the princess wasn't
looking.  Trolls hadn't come into Stale at all until two years
ago, when the prince and Ulfmaerr had struck a bargain with the local
tribe.  Since then they'd been regulars at the weekly market, trading
their strength and whatever they'd gleaned from the forest for
anything sweet or spicy.  After seeing Gifted walking about freely in
the capital, and meeting Dolly and Mope, she had expected---she wasn't
quite sure what, but not this.

Casting about for something to say, Noxy asked, "Why do they call it
the Dog Market?"

"Edward the Dog," Dolly said. She pointed to the wide stone steps at
the far side of the market that led down to the river docks. A gray
stone pillar stood beside them, on top of which was a life-sized
statue of a something that Noxy guessed must be a dog.

"He was the richest animal in the world," Dolly sighed. "When the dogs
started dying, Edward bought all the medicine he could, but nothing
worked.  In the end, when he was sick, he had the rest set aside to
build a school for the Gifted in the capital, the one that Mope went
to.  Then he came back here and waited for the end."

"That's really sad," Noxy said.

Dolly nodded. "Some Gifted say there are still wolves up north, in
Anuvatik, but I've never met anyone who has actually seen one. They're
supposed to be beautiful."

"My grandmother remembers dogs from when she was little," Noxy
said. "She showed me a picture of one once. I thought they looked kind
of like skinny bears." She shivered suddenly despite the warmth of the
sun. "It must have been horrible."

"It's part of why His Highness and the soldiers patrol the Blight the
way they do," Dolly said. "No-one knows what else the Pilots might
have left behind."

Noxy's eyes widened. "Left behind?"

"Oh yes," Dolly nodded. "The dog plague came out of the Blight.  Some
smugglers brought it back in a jar from somewhere near Fast Lake.  It
didn't do anything to *them*, of course---it only killed dogs."  She
glanced at the princess to make sure she wasn't listening, then added,
"That's part of why they're so worried about smugglers.  If there's
anything else like that---anything that might kill people instead of
just animals---well, they'd rather be the ones to find it, wouldn't
they?"

As Noxy was digesting that, an angry voice near the market gate was
answered by another.  As others joined in, two men materialized out of
the crowd.  "Your Highness?" the first said.  "Your Highness, I think
it's time to go."

Noxy blinked.  It was Jinpa, the soldier who'd been with the prince
yesterday.  And the other man, the one keeping an eye on the crowd
while Jinpa gently took the wicker windmill that the princess had been
playing with out of her hands and gave it back to the stallkeeper, was
Manpa.  Both wore sleeveless leather vests and baggy gray trousers
instead of their uniform jackets.

"Did I do something wrong?" Princess Ogmin asked plaintively.

"No, no, no," Jinpa soothed.  "It's just---how would you like to go
down to the river and see the barges?  Would you like that?"

She glanced at Dolly, who nodded.  "All right."  She brightened.
"They sell beaver tails there too!"

As Jinpa steered the princess and Dolly toward the river steps and
their guardian pillar, Noxy fell in beside Manpa.  "What's going on?"
she asked quietly.

The soldier shook his head.  "Somebody strung some farmer up along a
lamp post last night.  He's all right," he added hastily.  "They
didn't hang him or all, they just went along by roping him 'round and
gagging him."  His mouth twitched.  "Without by leaving any clothes on
him, folks say."

Noxy snorted. "Does that sort of thing happen a lot around here?"

Manpa made a face.  "Been come along three or four times, these last
few months.  Folk say it's smugglers settling scores, but this one
swears he's nought to do along by that.  Says whoever it was stole his
horse, too, and now he's got to haul a wagon load of bricks back out
along his own place by himself.  We'd best away Her Highness before
there's too much shouting, is all."

The soldiers stayed on either side of the princess as they walked to
the river stairs.  Princess Ogmin clapped her hands at the sight of a
square-nosed river barge casting off to start the long journey down
the Trout to the ocean.  The boxes of dried apples, crates of apple
jelly in heavy glass jars, and barrels of apple cider lashed down on
its deck weighed it down so far that its gunwales were only a handspan
above the water.  Two men at its bow called, "Heyyup...  hey!" to each
other as they pushed the barge away from the dock with long iron-shod
bamboo poles.  A third man sat on a crate at the center of the barge
with a steaming cup of tea in one hand and a heavy ax laid across his
lap.

"Is that in case they get caught on a snag?" Noxy asked Dolly,
pointing.

The troll glanced at the princess, who was tugging on Jinpa's vest and
pointing to where a fish had just splashed in the water. "Officially,"
she replied in an undertone. "But there are thieves on the river.
Most would think twice before trying to take a barge, but not all of
them.  And sometimes *things* come floating down out of the Blight."

Princess Ogmin busied herself tossing pebbles into the river.  Noxy
threw a few as well, but then felt a twinge in the back of her mind.
Charger was awake, and thirsty, and wondering where she was.  *Soon*,
she mind-spoke soothingly.

When the princess finally declared that she was bored, Jinpa jogged up
the stairs, then waved for the others to join him.  The shouting in
the market had died down, the stallkeepers having lost interest in the
aggrieved farmer's outrage as people showed up with money to spend.

The princess stopped at the kite makers' stall, which was now
festooned with brightly-painted fabric diamonds.  Next to it, a stout
woman with a stern look on her face was grilling leeks and red
peppers.  When the smell made Noxy's stomach rumble again, Dolly
smiled and reached for the small leather purse that hung from her
belt.

"Please, let me," Noxy said, reaching for her own. "How much is it for
three skewers?"

"They're two winkles apiece," the woman replied without looking up.

"Two winkles?" Dolly exclaimed. "For leeks and peppers?  Why, that's
robbery!"

The woman looked up and frowned. "Four for you," she said curtly.

Noxy gasped. "Come on," she said loudly, taking Dolly's arm.  "I can
smell *proper* cooking up ahead."

"Probably better than what I can smell," the leek seller said, just
loudly enough to be overhead. Noxy whirled around, angry words ready
to spill out of her mouth, but the woman had turned to speak to a
neighbor.

As they walked into the market, Noxy said, "How can she say something
like that? Dolly, I'm really sorry."

"It's just how people are around here," the troll replied mildly.

"But...but she said it right *to* you!"  Noxy suddenly realized that
her hands were clenched into fists. She spun around to go back and
give the cook a piece of her mind and walked straight into Prince
Thokmay.

"Oh!" she exclaimed. Their faces were almost touching for a moment.
For some reason she found herself blushing. "I'm sorry, I didn't---"

"It's quite all right," the prince said, just as flustered. He stepped
back to make some space. The two soldiers behind him kept their eyes
on the crowd.  "How have you been enjoying the market?"

"It was fine until a moment ago. But that woman was just *really* rude
to Dolly!"

The prince glanced over at the leek seller, who was eyeing them
sidelong.  His jaw set.  "Was she, now?"

"Your Highness, please, just---" Dolly started, but Prince Thokmay had
already spun on his heel and gone back to the leek seller's stall.
Noxy couldn't hear what he said, but she could see the anger and
reluctant deference on the cook's face.

Dolly sighed.  "I wish he hadn't done that.  It just makes things
worse."

"But she was *rude*!" Noxy burst out.

The troll shrugged.  "She didn't throw anything at me.  Or get her
neighbors to."  She sighed again.  "I just hope my son doesn't find
out.  He gets so---ssh, he's coming back."

The prince's jaw was still clenched as he rejoined them.  "I'm very
sorry about that," he said to Dolly, bowing slightly.  "You shouldn't
have to---"

Something suddenly roared a couple of aisles away.  Someone shrieked
in reply.  The prince's eyes widened.  "That's Ogmin!"  He sprinted
toward the sound with his two bodyguards on his heels and Noxy and
Dolly behind them.

The princess was standing in front of a dozen barrels of pressed
apples with her hands over her mouth. An enormous brown bear was
grumbling to herself in front of her, while the skinniest man Noxy had
ever seen made patting motions in the air with his hands at Manpa and
Jinpa, who had drawn their swords. "It's all right, it's all right,
she's fine, she's fine," the skinny man fretted. Noxy wasn't sure
whether he was talking about the princess or the bear.

"Ogmin, what's wrong?"  He put his arm around her shoulder and kissed
her cheek. "What's wrong, big sister?"

"I'm sorry," she squeaked. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry."  Tears
rolled down her frightened face.

"It's all right, Your Highness," the skinny man said. "Isn't it, Rust?
Everybody's all right, aren't they?"

"She stepped on my paw," the bear muttered.

"Yes yes yes, but it was an accident, wasn't it?" The skinny man wrung
his hands. "Oh, I'm sorry, Your Highness. Rust didn't mean to startle
you, did you, Rust?"

The bear didn't answer.  "*Did* you, Rust?" the man repeated more
sharply.

"...my paw..." the bear muttered again.

Prince Thokmay sighed and waved his free hand at Manpa and Jinpa and
his bodyguards to sheathe their swords.  "Are you all right?" he asked
his sister gently.

"I'm sorry," she repeated.  "I didn't mean to."

"It's all right.  You didn't hurt her.  Did she?"  The prince looked
meaningfully at the bear, who was looking at Dolly, who had gone to
stand beside the princess, who had buried her fingers in the troll's
pelt.

"Hrrm," the bear rumbled deep in her throat. "No, Your Highness. Not
hurt.  She just caught my toe along under her shoe."

"And you're sorry you startled the princess, aren't you?" the skinny
man coaxed her. "Aren't you, Rust?"

The bear snuffled, then nodded her head heavily. "Yes.  I'm sorry I
startled Her Highness. Won't do it again."

"Well then that's all right, isn't it?" the skinny man said,
relieved. "Everyone's all right, no harm done."

"No harm done," the prince agreed.  He studied the skinny man, whose
gray coat and crushed hat made him look like an underfed rat. "I don't
believe I've seen you here before."

The skinny man shook his head vigorously. "No, Your Highness, no, you
probably haven't, I'd be surprised if you had.  Muddh's the name,
Muddh, that's me.  But everyone knows Rust, isn't that right, Rust?
Rust has been coming here practically forever.  Never been trouble to
anyone, have you, Rust?"  The bear snorted.

"You've come to trade?" the prince asked.

"Oh yes, Your Highness.  Bobbles and bangles, ribbons and bows, that
sort of thing. Here, like this." He dodged around the bear and pulled
a spool of dark blue ribbon patterned with gold roses from the
ramshackle wagon behind her.

"Oh, that's like my nice shoes!" the princess exclaimed.

"Is it?  Truly?"  As quick as a bee, Muddh pulled a short knife out
of his belt and cut an arm's length of ribbon from the spool.  "Well
then, here you go," he said, holding it out to her.

Dolly interrupted before the princess could reply.  "Now, Your
Highness, remember what we talked about?"

"Um..." Princess Ogmin frowned, then brightened. "Can you please tell
me how much it costs?" she asked the trader.

"Oh, nothing, nothing at all," he gushed. "It'll do good along my
business, having royalty for customers, Your Highness.  You'd be doing
me a certain courtesy, you would.  Why, by tomorrow I'm sure everyone
will be talking about us!"

Noxy couldn't help but snort. The people around them had stopped for a
moment when the bear roared, but now they were bustling about their
business again as if they saw royalty every day---which by now, she
reflected, they probably did. She doubted anyone would take much
notice of where the princess bought her ribbon.

But Dolly was still frowning, and the prince as well.  Muddh's
nervous grin widened even further.  "But I'll tell you what. I'll tell
you what. I'll take, um, what do we want for the ribbon, Rust?"

"Twenty-two winkles an arm for the blue," the bear rumbled without
hesitation.

"Twenty winkles an arm," Muddh said.  "And if you buy a whole arm,
I'll give you this ring to go with it!"  With a flourish, Muddh held
up a small wooden ring.  "It's a lucky ring," he added in a
conspiratorial tone, winking at the princess.  "Here, give me your
hand." He slid the ring gently onto the princess's finger. "If you wear
it for a whole week without once taking it off, and then make a wish
and throw it down the deepest well you can find, guess what will
happen?"

"I'll get my wish?" the princess gasped.

"You might," the trader agreed, nodding vigorously. "You just
might. Now, what was the ribbon again?  Eighteen winkles for an arm's
length, is that what we agreed?"

Noxy and the prince rolled their eyes at each other.  Muddh chattered
to the princess non-stop as he tucked the palmful of carved wooden
shells she offered him into his pocket and then wound the ribbon
around his finger to make a tight little spool.

*Hungry!* Charger mind-spoke to Noxy.

She cleared her throat.  "I really should go back and check on my
cloud," she told the prince.

He nodded.  "I think that would be a good idea.  Ogmin?  I bet the
cook has made biscuits..."

As they walked toward the market gate, the prince muttered to Jinpa,
"Have you ever seen him before?"

"Don't think so, Your Highness," the soldier replied. "But Rust's been
coming along by for years, though.  Always brings a person with her to
count out shells, tie things up, that sort of thing." The soldier
cleared his throat. "Usually not too bright.  The person, I mean.  The
bear's definitely in charge."

"And people here are all right with that?" he asked, glancing
meaningfully at Dolly.

Jinpa shrugged.  "I guess all right depends on who you're talking to.
Back-mouthing a fully-grown bear's a heavy bit different than
back-mouthing such as a troll or a pig or all."

## Chapter 5: Flight

Princess Ogmin wanted to stop on the way back to the garrison house to
see if her favorite seamstress would sew her new ribbon onto her dress
right then and there.  When Noxy said that she really had to get back
to see how her cloud was doing, the princess immediately asked if she
could go for a ride, because it wasn't fair that Prince Thokmay had
flown and she hadn't.  Noxy looked at the prince, who nodded.

"Of course," she said.  The princess squealed with delight and began
to pull her down the street, urging her to go faster so they could
start right away.

Noxy was careful to lay her hands on Charger before mind-speaking to
him---the last thing she wanted was for Aft to find out about her
ability before she figured out how to tell her mother and grandmother.
*Hungry?* she asked.

*Yes hungry said hungry long time hungry* the cloud answered
petulantly.  He began to bunch himself together.

*Wait!* Noxy formed a picture in her mind of the prince and princess
sitting beside her.  *Good?  Or hurt?*

*Good?* the cloud replied hesitantly.

*Can fly?*

*Yes can fly!* the cloud protested.  *Can fly always!*

Noxy smiled.  "He's healing well," she said aloud.  "But I should take
him up just to see.  We can go up together after lunch if he's
better," she added quickly as the princess began to pout.  "Besides,
he needs to eat."  It was true---Charger was as dry as cotton wool.  No
matter how sore he was, he needed to find a pond somewhere and get
some sunshine.

Back in her room, it only took her a couple of minutes to swap her
borrowed finery for her flying clothes.  Her trousers and jacket had
been washed overnight, and were slightly scratchy in a way that made
her suddenly homesick.  She wrapped her scarf around her neck---she
wouldn't be going high enough to need anything more---pulled on her
gloves, and trotted down the stairs and back across the courtyard to
the makeshift cloud pen.  She didn't realize that she was humming
happily the whole time.

Charger pulled himself together until he was dense enough to stand on.
Noxy clambered up his side like a baby troll climbing onto its
mother.  *Ouch!* the cloud complained.

*Sorry,* she mind-spoke.  The patch that the branch had torn through
the day before was dark gray, and had the consistency of a thick
stew. She pushed her arm into it gently.  *Hurts?*

*Hurts,* the cloud replied.  Noxy pulled out her arm and stroked him.
The quick scramble up the cloud's side had made her shoulder hurt too.
All of a sudden she didn't want to be this close to the ground any
more.

*Up!* she ordered Charger, and, "I won't be long," she called to the
prince and princess and the soldiers and servants standing with them.

The hungry cloud didn't need to be told twice.  He rose with a lurch,
making Noxy whoop.  The walls of the garrison house sank below them.
Suddenly she was above the roof---above all of Apple Bridge's roofs.
The clock tower seemed to stare at her jealously, its green dial a
blind staring eye, before it dropped away as well and she was up in
the sky, up in *her* world, up where she belonged.

*Good?* she mind-asked Charger, pushing her hands as deep as they would
go into him and scrunching them up.  She mind-heard the cloud's purr
of satisfaction as she scratched around the patch torn by the branch.

The world looked so big beneath her, stretching on and on until it
blurred and hazed with distance.  Apple Bridge was so small by
comparison.  Streets that had seemed so wide as she walked them were
narrow tracks between blocks of slate and tile.  Even the market was a
child's toy, stalls and wagons and bales of cloth scattered like the
pieces of a forgotten game.

The river sparkled sharply on the far side of the market.  *There,*
Noxy ordered.  Charger turned slowly, stretching his edges to catch the
breeze, and drifted toward it.

Noxy shaded her eyes with her hand.  Half a dozen barges laden with
crates and bales were floating downstream.  One flew the yellow and
gray flag of Gandan to show that it was carrying goods to pay taxes.
It and the ones behind it were all piled high like the one she and the
princess had seen setting out that morning.

All except the one trailing behind.  Noxy frowned.  She couldn't see
anyone on the rear barge at all.  Had it come loose?  *Go closer,* she
mind-spoke to Charger.

*Later,* the cloud replied sleepily.  She could feel him drifting into
a contented half-slumber as he soaked up the fresh air and sunshine
that clouds fed on.

*Please?* She pictured herself scratching his itchy spots again and
sent it his way.  It was another thing she could do that other
cloudherds couldn't---another thing she had decided to keep secret.
Charger grumbled as if he was an old cirrus rather than a frisky young
cumulus, but pulled in his edges and turned to angle across the wind.

As they approached the barge, two small gray figures scampered across
its deck.  One stood on its hind legs and began turning a wheel with
its paws, while the other leaned against a rudder post to nudge the
barge back into the middle of the river where the current was
strongest.

Noxy blinked.  Raccoons? She didn't know that raccoons could sail a
barge.  But then she shook her head, annoyed with herself.  That
sounded like something the leek seller in the market that morning
might have said.  Of course Gifted raccoons could sail a barge if they
wanted to.  Why, they were probably very good at it, and even if they
weren't, it was none of her business.

She shaded her eyes again to look north toward the Blight.  Its border
was clear from this height: in the space of half a gallop, the rich
green of Gandan's farms and forests was replaced by the brown and gray
of barren soil and dead trees.  Patches of white lay scattered through
the wasteland, salt or snow or something worse, and a few lonely
tumbledown buildings marked where farms had been swallowed up years
ago.

She shivered.  The mountains she had grown up in were bare, but not
barren, not like this.  She wondered what it would be like to grow up
with that on your doorstep, creeping closer year after year, and
shivered again.

Still, Charger was doing well---better than she had feared while tossing
and turning in bed after the previous night's dinner.  She should
probably give him one more day to rest, but he would certainly be able
to take the princess up tomorrow.  *Let's go back,* she mind-spoke,
patting him.  She caught herself humming as he turned around.  She'd
give Charger a little rest, and then bring the princess up.

And the prince too, if he wanted.  She hoped he would.  The last time
they had been on cloudback together they had huddled together under a
thin blanket to stay warm.  She wondered if he thought about that
night as often as she did...

*At the same moment, a few gallops downriver from Apple Bridge, a
flat-bottomed skiff slid up to the raccoons' barge.  A rough-looking
man stepped onto the barge and pried open the side of an oversized
crate.  The horse that had been hidden inside stepped uncertainly into
the light.  The man tossed a small bag of shells at the raccoons
contemptuously and slipped a halter over the horse's muzzle.  She
tossed her head, but stilled when the man smacked her sharply.  When
he twitched on her reins, she followed him meekly onto the skiff and
back into servitude.*

Noxy heard the shouting before she saw the mob outside the garrison's
gate.  *Hold,* she mind-spoke to Charger.  Forty or fifty people were
bunched together in the street, pumping the air with their fists and
stomping their feet.

Master Bortja stood on a crate in front of them.  "What do we want?"
he bellowed.

"A charter!" the crowd roared.

"When do we want it?"

"Now!"

Soldiers stood in pairs by the gates.  More were forming ranks inside.
She could see Sergeant Gyalpa grabbing arms and pushing people in the
right direction when they didn't move quickly enough to satisfy him.
The prince was there too.  Catching sight of the cloud, he waved her
away.  She didn't need to be told twice---whatever was happening, she
wanted to be well clear of it.

Below her, the prince lowered his arm.  "All good?" he asked,
returning Jinpa's salute as the soldier halted in front of him.

"Yes, Your Highness," Jinpa replied, slightly breathless.  "The troll
is minding her, and Manpa's stayed up as well."

"Good.  Sergeant Gyalpa, are you ready?  Sergeant Dambu?  Good.
Remember, no one does anything until we find out what this is all
about.  Now, open the gate!"

Sergeant Gyalpa blew three long blasts on his whistle.  Two soldiers
grunted as they lifted the iron bar that held the gate shut.  Two
others began cranking a windlass.  With a rattle, the gate began to
rise.

The crowd outside fell silent.  Master Bortja stepped down from his
crate to stand with his hands clasped behind his back.  "In ranks!"
the prince ordered, his voice cracking.  He strode forward, one hand
resting on the hilt of his sword and the other swinging at his side.
*Don't look back,* he told himself. *Don't look back. They're right
behind you.*

He counted twelve paces in his head once he was through the gate, just
as Sergeant Gyalpa had suggested, then halted and raise his arm.  He
only closed his eyes in relief for a heartbeat when Sergeant Gyalpa
shouted, "Troop... halt!" behind him.  Thirty boots hit the pavement
with a synchronized thud.

Master Bortja straightened and bowed.  "Your Highness," he said in a
loud, clear voice.

The prince inclined his head.  "Master Bortja."  He hesitated 'What is
the meaning of this?' and 'Be about your business immediately!' and
'Could you not have written a letter?' all flashed through his mind,
but that was what his father, his brother, and Mope would have said.
Instead, he let his hesitation stretch.

It was clearly not what Master Bortja had expected.  As the silence
grew uncomfortable, then awkward, he cleared his throat.  "Thank you
for coming to speak with us, Your Highness."  He gestured at the
crowd.  "With all of us.  Though I assure you, your soldiers are
unnecessary."

"As was your shouting," the prince replied sharply.

Master Bortja spread his hands.  "Sometimes there is no other way to
be heard.  Pargyu!"

A burly man stepped forward.  A couple of bystanders clapped him on
the shoulder.

When Master Bortja nodded to him, the man bowed awkwardly to the
prince.  "M'name's Pargyu," he said, deferential and belligerent at
the same time.  "I'm a bricksmith.  Been doing along by that all my
life, never been cause by trouble.  Then last night some troll comes
along by my room and drags me out from bed and, and strips me for
naked and ties me up like a hog for market and, and..."

"...and hangs him from a lamp post down by the market," Master Bortja
finished.  "But that's not all, is it?"

"No sir," the bricksmith said.  "Not along by half it isn't.  Beast
stole my horse too!"

The crowd murmured.  The prince cocked his head to one side.  "So
you'd like to report a theft?"

"No!  I mean, yes!" the bricksmith spluttered.  "And, and, and I want
a word by that troll of yours!  It's along time he learned a lesson
about what he can't do by people!"

"Rightly said!" "Full truth!"  The crowd wasn't murmuring any more.

The prince looked at their angry faces, his heart pounding. *Never
let them see your fear,* Kulbinder had told him.  *Only prey are
afraid.*

"Very well," he said.  "If you'd like to go with Sergeant Gyalpa, I'm
sure Mope would be happy to clear this up.  Would you like a cup of
tea while you're speaking with him?  I would offer one to your friends
as well, but I think the kitchen staff would require more warning for
that."

"I don't want by tea!" the bricksmith squawked.  "I want my horse
back!  And I want that animal of yours out *here* where we can *all*
have a word by him!"

"You will mind how you speak by His Highness!" Sergeant Gyalpa
barked.  "Or it won't be his troll you'll be by to talk with, and it
won't be the kitchen you'll be along by to sit!"

Master Bortja smacked his thigh with his hand.  "You see?" he said to
the crowd.  "You see who they favor?  Beasts over men!  Well I say,
men over beasts!"

"Men over beasts!" someone shouted from the back of the crowd.  "Men
over beasts!"  Others took up the cry.  People began clapping and
stomping their feet in time.  "Men over beasts!"

Two long steps took Master Bortja back to his crate.  "What do we
want?" he bellowed as he straightened on top of it.

"A charter!" the crowd roared.

"When do we want it?"

"Now!"

Sergeant Gyalpa looked at Prince Thokmay.  "Sir, I think---"

The prince raised a hand.  "No.  We're not going to use the soldiers
on them."  Then he glanced at his hand.  Was that rain?

Another drop pinged off his helmet.  He looked up at the cloud
circling above them, then looked back at the sergeant and grinned.
"We're not going to need to."

It only took a dozen heartbeats for those first scattered drops to
turn into a shower.  Another dozen and they were a downpour.  The
prince bit his lip to stop himself from laughing as the shouts of
"Charter!" and "Now!" turned into exclamations and curses.  Cold water
was dripping down the back of his neck, but he didn't care, not when
the crowd broke up, people running for doorways or toward the market
to shelter under stall awnings.

His humor vanished instantly when he saw the fury on Master Bortja's
face.  The merchant stepped off his crate, his hands bunched into
fists at his sides, and spat on the cobblestones before turning and
striding away.

"Sir, I---" Sergeant Gyalpa started indignantly.

The prince raised his hand again.  "Let him go," he said, suddenly
weary.  "I'm sure we'll see him again soon."

## Chapter 6: Remembrance

Noxy circled Apple Bridge one more time to give Cloud a final,
satisfying drizzle.  *Home now,* she mind-spoke to the cloud, forming
a picture of the garrison house's rear courtyard.  He was fluffy now
that he'd rained, and she had already had to remind him once not to
thin out so much that she fell right through him.

*Not home,* the cloud replied muzzily. *Home far.*

Noxy felt a sudden pang.  *Yes,* she replied, *Home far.  Stay here
now.  Home soon.*  She hoped that was true.  Raining on the mob had
been exactly the kind of trouble Aft had warned her not to go
looking for, which was half the reason she had done it.  But thinking
about what Aft would say when she found out made her think about
Stale, and about how long it would be until she saw her mother and
grandmother again.

But Prince Thokmay was waiting when she landed, which almost made up
for it.  Sergeant Gyalpa was there too, scowling while the prince
struggled to hold in a grin.  She didn't bother to try to hide hers as
she slid down Charger's flank and gave him one final pat.

"Mission accomplished, sir!" she said loudly, saluting sloppily.

The prince snorted, turning it into a cough as Sergeant Gyalpa glared
at her.

"That was near by a mess of you, m'lady, begging your pardon for
speaking along so freely," he began.  "My men had the all of it to
hand, and if anyone had been hurt---"

"Oh, please."  Noxy rolled her eyes.  "It was just rain."

"If anyone had been *hurt*," the sergeant continued implacably, "It
would have been exactly what Master Bortja did want, especially along
after this morning's news."

"What do you mean?" Noxy asked, glancing at the prince.

His not-quite-a-grin slipped and fell.  "The farmer from yesterday,"
he said.  "They found him this morning in a blackberry bush halfway
back to his farm.  It looks like the tornado got him after all."

"Oh.  Oh, Thokmay, I'm so sorry."  Her elation and belligerence
vanished.  How could she have forgotten that someone was missing?
When it happened in the mountains, the whole village turned out to
search, and kept searching until there was no point looking any more.
"Are his children...?"

"They've been told," Sergeant Gyalpa said gruffly.  "His Highness has
already promised the kingdom will mind to them along 'til they're
grown."

"I'm so sorry," she repeated.  *I'm sorry...*

*Hurt?* Charger mind-asked.

*Not hurt,* she lied, thinking of the two wide-eyed little boys, and
of how she had felt when her mother told her that her own father
wouldn't ever be coming home...  She wiped her eyes with her sleeve,
feeling angry with herself.  Why was she crying?  She didn't even know
their names.

The prince cleared his throat uncomfortably.  "Um, Sergeant?  Could
you...?"

"Of course, Your Highness."  Sergeant Gyalpa saluted, turned on his
heel, and marched off to yell at a pair of soldiers for scraping a
crate they were carrying against a wall, now it would have to be
repainted, in fact, that sounded like an excellent way for them to
spend tomorrow.

Prince Thokmay didn't really notice him leave as he pulled a yellow
handkerchief from his sleeve and held it out to Noxy.  "Here.  I, um,
I'm pretty sure it's clean."

"Thanks."  Noxy wiped her eyes.  "Are these part of the uniform?"

The prince's mouth quirked.  "Hardly.  It's for when Ogmin gets a
runny nose.  She has her own, but she's always losing them.  No,
please, keep it," the prince added hastily as Noxy tried to return
it.  "The staff will wash it."

Noxy nodded.  "Thanks," she repeated, then smacked her forehead with
her hand.  "The princess---I'm sorry, I can't take her flying this
afternoon.  Charger's healing pretty quickly, but raining on everyone
like that has knocked him out.  I don't think he should---"

"Don't worry," the prince said soothingly, patting the air with his
hands.  "She's probably already forgotten about it.  Besides, she has
to get dressed for the service.  For the farmer who was killed
yesterday."  His face grew serious.  "I do too.  I'm supposed to say
something."

"What will you say?" Noxy asked after a moment.

The prince shook his head.  "I don't know."

Two hundred years ago, when Apple Bridge was just a handful of houses
around an open field where a weekly market was held, its inhabitants
had laid down slabs of stone to make a diamond twenty strides from end
to end.  Every Purplesday, after the market closed, they gathered
there to thank the land for its bounty.  Infants were brought to be
named and introduced to their neighbors.  When they were grown, they
would come with someone they loved to tie their wrists together and
say their vows.  And when they died, those who had known them would
gather to tell their stories one last time.

As Apple Bridge grew, so too did its witness hall.  A roof was built
to keep the rain off the weddings.  Walls were put up, then the whole
hall was torn down so that a bigger hall could be built with a raised
brick floor and a room on one side where babies could fall asleep
after they'd been named, or while their parents were being wed.
Another witness hall was built beside the market, a larger one with
Bantangui tapestries and squares of dayglass in its windows, but the
Old Hall remained the town's heart.

If the farmer had died a normal death---old age or a plague or a fall
while pruning an apple tree---his family and his neighbors and his
friends wouldn't have brought him into Apple Bridge at all.  They
would have laid out a diamond with a few stones somewhere he loved and
told his stories there.  *But that isn't how he died,* the prince
thought bleakly as he walked the half gallop from the garrison house
to the Old Hall with his sister beside him.  A handful of soldiers and
household staff followed behind them in uniforms so clean they almost
shone.  *He died because I still haven't found who's behind that
tornado.*

Almost two hundred people crowded into the hall.  The older bridgers,
and the people who had come in from surrounding farms, wore long
forest-green cloaks with slits cut in the sides for their arms.  A few
of the townspeople did as well, but others were dressed in black and
gray with dark cloth collars around their necks.  The prince bowed to
the elderly balance standing next to the farmer's coffin, who inclined
her head in return.  He might be a prince outside, but in this place,
he was just another traveller.

The balance took a step back and turned her hands palms up.  Whispered
voices stilled and cloth rustled as those gathered followed her lead.
"Soil becomes grain," she said, her voice clear and strong.  "And
grain becomes flesh, and flesh becomes soil again.  So too does this
world fashion new spirits from old.  Thus it has been, thus it is,
thus it ever will be."

"Thus it ever will be," the crowd responded.

She lowered her hands.  "Our friend was a good man and a bad one,
honest and dishonest, fair and unfair, as are we all.  Today, we will
tell his stories, so that the world may truly know who returns to it.
Who shall begin?"

After a moment's hesitation, the younger of two boys the prince had
seen the day before stepped forward, his grief-stricken mother's hand
on his shoulder.  "Daddy used to give me piggy-backs," he said.
"Every time I asked, even when it wasn't bedtime."  He spun around and
buried his face in his mother's cloak, weeping.

"One time..."  The older boy stopped, overcome.  The gathering waited
silently.  They knew how hard some stories were to tell.  "One time,
I, I wanted to help him along by fixing the chicken coop, so I cut the
strings on the poles he brought along back from town so I could stack
them for him, but I didn't know..."  He swallowed.  "I didn't know he
meant by to use that string to tie the poles along together.  He was
really mad on me, and told me he would have to take my kite down to
pieces to get more string, but he didn't.  He walked all the way along
into town again and, and he got by some string for the coop and some
more for along my kite and took me along back to fly it."

One by one, those who had known him best came forward, each with their
story.  He still had one man's saw, a year after he borrowed it, and
had ducked every request for its return.  He had helped the old couple
who lived next to them burn back some brambles that had come creeping
out of Blighted land---the scratches on his arms and legs had taken
weeks to heal, but he had never complained.  He argued with people
sometimes for no good reason, and loved to sit on the fence post
nearest the road with a cup of tea or an apple, just to make
conversation with whoever passed by.  He was honest and dishonest,
fair and unfair, just like everyone else, and every story stuffed a
little more anger into Prince Thokmay's heart.

Finally it was his turn to speak.  "I never met him," the prince said,
his voice cracking.  "But I know this.  When the tornado took him, he
was riding toward it---toward his home and his family, when he could
have stayed in town.  I promise, I will do no less."  He bowed to the
farmer's family as if to royalty and squeezed his sister's hand.  "I
promise," he repeated in a whisper.

He kept his head bowed as those gathered began to sing, not wanting
anyone to see his tears.  He missed Sergeant Dorbu and Kulbinder and
his friends in the capital more than he could ever let his sister or
anyone else see.

But then something brushed softly against his mind as softly as a
whisper, a lonely ache that was somehow comforting at the same time,
as familiar as it was strange.  His breath caught.  "Noxy?" he
whispered incredulously.

Noxy hadn't gone to the service.  The prince told her she would be
welcome, but she shook her head.  "I should stay with Charger," she
said.  "And my shoulder's bothering me again."

The prince nodded.  "I understand.  See you at dinner tonight?
Something quiet," he added hastily.  "Just family."

Half an hour later she found herself sitting with Mope and Dolly in a
comfortable little kitchen down the hall from the apartment the two
trolls shared.  "We take most of our meals here," Dolly explained as
she poured the tea.  "And Her Highness likes to help me bake cakes.
She has quite a sweet tooth.  Here you go."

"Thanks," Noxy said, putting the tea on the table to cool.

Dolly set down a tray of cured apple slices and sprinkled a spoonful
of sugar onto them, then nudged her son.  "Put that away," she scolded
gently.  "We have a guest."

"Sorry, mother."  Mope tucked a scrap of ribbon into his book to mark
his place and set it aside to pick up his own cup of tea.

They chatted for a while about nothing in particular, as people often
do on quiet afternoons when everyone else is busy doing something
else.  When Noxy yawned for the third time, Dolly shooed her back to
her own room.  "Nap when you can," she advised.  "You're sure to run
short of sleep some day to make up for it."

Noxy took off her overclothes and curled up on the bed.  The wool
blanket was lighter than the one at home, and didn't smell of goat,
but had the same comforting scratchy feel.  She closed her eyes and
let her mind drift.  Her weariness felt like a fat cold cat curled up
beside her, or like one of the slow-moving old clouds that Stale
children learned mind-speaking with.

Thinking about Stale made her think about Charger.  She reached out
with her mind.  *All good?* she asked.

*Mm?* the cloud replied muzzily.  Noxy smiled.  Clouds never really
slept, not like people or animals, but nothing and nobody was better
at drowsing.

On impulse she tried reaching further.  It wasn't really reaching, she
thought.  It was more like trying to be so still that she became
perfectly clear, as if she were a little mountain pool waiting for
raindrops to make ripples on her surface.

Her breathing slowed.  She couldn't mind-hear any other clouds, but
there was *something*, something that felt lonely and tired and gray,
just like she did.  As her eyelids grew heavier, the last thing she
thought she heard was the prince whispering, "Noxy?"

## Chapter 7: The Tornado Returns

The farmer's wife invited the prince and princess to join the family
for a meal after the remembrance.  To her obvious relief, the prince
declined.  "It's a time for those who knew him best," he said with yet
another bow.  "But with your permission, I'll ask the staff to send
some treats for the children.  Please---" He raised a hand to
forestall her protest.  "I would be grateful if you would accept.  For
them."

The staff and soldiers behind him talked quietly amongst themselves as
they walked back to the garrison house.  The princess held Prince
Thokmay's hand, but he hardly noticed how uncharacteristically quiet
she was.  He was thinking about what had happened---had that really
been Noxy?  Had she been trying to mind-speak with him?  Was that even
possible?

He was so deep in his own thoughts that he jumped when Sergeant Gyalpa
said, "Hold!" and stepped in front of him.  They had just turned a
corner, and nearly run into a knot of angry people gathered around a
water pump.  The crowd fell silent as they realized they were being
watched, and by whom.

"What's going on here?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked, pretending not to see
one of the men in the crowd dropping a stone he had been about to
throw and kicking it behind him.

"Oh, thank the Pilots!  Excuse me.  Excuse me, please."  A skinny
figure with a servile hunch to his shoulders scurried through the
crowd to wring his hands in front of the sergeant.  "They meant no
harm, sir, I'm sure, it was just a misunderstanding."

"Who meant no harm?"  Sergeant Gyalpa uncrossed his arms and glowered
at Muddh.

"Them, sir.  They were just along to fill their bucket, is all."
Muddh pointed at the pair of raccoons who had followed at his heels.
"Only *some* of these people thought, well, you know by how some are
here with the Gifted, sir, they thought, well..."

Prince Thokmay interrupted before the sergeant could reply.  "They
thought what?"

Muddh wrung his hands, nervous under the glares of the townspeople
behind him on his back.  "They just thought... Well, Your Highness,
they thought by maybe such as these should, well, they should find by
elsewhere to get their water."

The prince nodded.  "I see."  His voice cracked slightly, but he
ignored it.  *This* was something he could do something about.
"Sergeant?"

"Yes sir?"

"The stable at the garrison house---it has a pump, doesn't it?"

Sergeant Gyalpa nodded.  "It does, sir."

"Good.  Now, who's here for water, and who's just along to watch?
Come on, don't be shy.  You!"  The prince pointed at a heavy-set man
with a water jar hanging from a sling over his shoulder.  "Were you
here to fill that?"

The man swallowed, his anger having turned to worry. "Um, yes?  Your
Highness?"

"Good.  Why don't you come with us and refill it at the stable?  After
all," he added as people started to murmur.  "It's the same water,
from the same pipes, isn't it?  And the rest you."  He raised his
voice.  "If you've brought a jar or a pot or a bucket, raise your
hand."

A few hands went up.  "You," the prince said, pointing at a woman.
"That's empty, isn't it?  And yours too, good lady?"

Sergeant Gyalpa cleared his throat.  "Um, Your Highness, I don't think
this is a good---"

"And you!"  Prince Thokmay ignored the sergeant and pointed at another
man who was edging toward the back of the crowd.  "Please, don't be
shy.  I'm sure there's plenty for everyone.  Sergeant!  Make sure
nobody loses their way.  Now come along, everyone, let's get those
buckets filled."

"Your Highness, what are you doing?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked in a low,
urgent voice as the townspeople began milling about, asking each other
what was happening and where were they going and was the prince
actually going to make them get their water from a stable?

"I'm fixing this," the prince said curtly, savoring the fury burning
in his chest.

The sergeant blew air through his mustache.  "Yes, sir, but, well, I
don't think you actually *can*, sir.  I mean, I'm not an expert along
by the law and all, but I don't think you can tell folk where along to
get their water, if you follow me."

"No?  Well then tell me, sergeant, please, what *can* I do?"  He waved
at the crowd.  "Can I make sure that all of Gandan's citizens are
treated equally, human or not?  Can I do that?"

Whatever answer the sergeant might have given was interrupted by the
deep voice of a gong ringing in the distance. Sergeant Gyalpa's head
whipped around.  "That's fire watch---along south side.  You two!"  He
pointed at the two nearest soldiers.  "Double time along to Hog
Street, find out---"

"No!  Listen!"  Muddh wrung his hands, fear written almost comically
on his face.  "Everyone, listen!  It's the tornado!  It's coming for
us!"

The crowd held its breath just long enough to hear the roaring in the
distance.  A second gong joined the first, then a third.  "Pilots save
us!" someone cried.  As if it was a signal, the scene dissolved into
chaos.  People scattered, dropping their jars and bottles and elbowing
aside anyone who got in their way.

"Form up!  Form up!" Sergeant Gyalpa bellowed.  "You lot, get the
princess back to the garrison house *now*!  You too, Your Highness, we
have to get you along by somewhere safe."

"No."  The prince shook off his arm.  "Take care of the princess.  I'm
going to find out what's going on.  You two---with me!"

Without waiting for an answer, he shouldered through the fleeing
people and pounded on the nearest door.  "Excuse me," he said, pushing
past the frightened woman who opened it, "I need to borrow your roof."

The prince pounded up the stairs with the two soldiers on his heels.
The upper floor of the house was one large room.  Partially-mended
tapestries hung on all four walls, each with a small work table in
front of it.  A second, smaller flight of stairs led up to an attic
bedroom with a shuttered skylight.  Two big steps took the prince from
the floor to a wicker chair to the dresser beneath the skylight.
Ignoring the, "Sir, wait, please!" behind him, he undid the latch and
pulled himself up onto the roof.

A loose tile slid away and rattled down the roof into the gutter as he
got to his feet, wiping his hands unconsciously on his uniform jacket.
Bird droppings, a few twigs, and a windblown piece of rain-faded
ribbon decorated the roof.  He ignored them all as he shaded his eyes
with his hand and looked south.

The tornado was a dark twisting column three times the height of the
clock tower.  It was still about two gallops outside Apple Bridge, but
even as he watched he could it see it coming closer, tearing a furrow
of ruins through the beanfields and flower beds that the townspeople
tended so carefully on their days off.

The tornado yanked a fence into the air and tore it to pieces.  A shed
followed, and then the tornado doubled back to pick up the scattered
fence posts and fling them in all directions.

"Sir!  Sir, what's it doing?"  The two soldiers had pulled themselves
up onto the roof.

"I don't know!"  He and Mope had scoured the garrison house's small
library for anything they could find about tornadoes.  Everything they
read agreed that they were short-tempered, but there was nothing about
them holding grudges.  Somebody had to be directing it...

The prince scanned the rooftops.  There!  Was that someone hiding
behind a chimney?  He reached for the soldier nearest him, but then a
crow fluttered into the air and winged away.

"It's like it's looking for something," the soldier said, pointing at
the tornado.

"Or someone," the prince replied grimly.  The furious dark spin of air
was moving back and forth like an angry old man trying to find a rat
in his kitchen.

Suddenly a horse and rider burst out of a stand of trees and raced
toward the road.  Roaring, the tornado gave chase, flinging branches
and clumps of grass and a wheelbarrow into the air behind it.

"Come on! Come on!" the prince and the soldiers shouted, urging the
rider on.  His horse's hooves threw up clods of fresh earth, and then
he was on the road, picking up speed as he headed toward town.

"Look out!"  The rider couldn't possibly have heard the shouts from
the rooftop, but some instinct made him swerve left just as the
tornado reached for him.

"Your Highness?" called a voice from inside the house.

"We're up here!" the prince yelled back without taking his eyes off
the chase in front of him.  "Come on, come *on*," he muttered.

Sergeant Dambu stuck her head up through the skylight.  A moment later
she clambered up onto the roof and saluted.  "Sir.  Sergeant Gyalpa
sent along a runner, sir.  Said you might be along by needing help."

"Thank you, sergeant. Can you make horses fly?"  The rider was back on
the road, just a gallop away from town, close enough for the prince to
see his beard and his bare arms, close enough for him to imagine the
terror he must be feeling.

"No sir, but if the tornado comes by closer, I might be along by
giving it a turn.  If that's needed, sir."

The prince glanced at her, then looked again in shock.  The garrison
magician looked like she hadn't slept in days, and was so exhausted
that she was trembling.  "Sergeant, are you all right?"

"Right enough, sir.  And better than him."

"Rot and ruin..." one of the soldiers whispered.  The horse had run
the best race it could, but on this day---its last day---its best
wasn't good enough.  With a final roar of victory, the tornado swept
across the road.  The rider's mouth opened in a scream no one could
hear as he and his horse flew into the air, then fell to lie side by
side in a field of green spring clover.

The tornado paused, whirling in place.  The prince could almost feel
it studying the town, thinking, *I could*.

"Sergeant..." the prince said quietly.  "Whatever you're going to
do..."

But then, as inexplicably as it had appeared, the tornado began to
move away.  It picked up speed as it went, lifting its tail so that it
spun freely in the air as it headed back toward the Blight, back
toward whatever or wherever it called home, leaving a furrow of
destruction in its wake.

The prince suddenly realized that the alarm gongs were still ringing.
"Go find Sergeant Gyalpa," he told the nearest soldier.  "Get those
gongs muffled, and let people know the danger has passed."

"Has it, sir?" the soldier asked.

"No," the prince said wearily.  "But it's what they'll want to hear.
And you---get a squad together, and a wagon.  We shouldn't leave him
there.  Or the horse, either."

Noxy's head hurt when she woke from her nap.  It wasn't a sharp pain
in one spot, but more like someone was trying to squeeze her brain
into a jar half a size too small.  She swallowed a mouthful of water
from the little jug on the table beside her bed, then grimaced.  The
slice of lemon that was supposed to freshen it had been sitting in the
water so long that all she could taste was the rind.

It took her twice as long as usual to tie her bootlaces, and when she
stood up, she had to put a hand on the wall to steady herself.  Was
she coming down with a fever?  Her forehead didn't feel clammy, or her
cheeks, but---

"Uh oh," she said stupidly, looking at the blotch of red on her hand.
Her nose was bleeding.  That hadn't happened in two years, not since
that day in Stale when she'd reached out with her mind to call the
clouds.

That's when she remembered hearing the prince whisper her name just
before she fell asleep.  But that must have been a dream.  Cloudherds
were forever talking about how convenient it would be if they could
mind-speak with each other instead of just with clouds, but it was
just talk.  Nobody have ever *done* it.

But nobody had ever mind-talked with a cloud a dozen gallops away
either, much less a whole heard of them all at once.  Not until she
had.

A small square of cloth, neatly folded, lay beside the wash basin on
the stand beneath her window.  She dipped the end in her water jug and
used it to dig the clots and scabs out of her nose.  The lemon in the
water made it sting a little, but that was good---it helped clear her
head.  By the time she was ready to sneak down the hall and dump the
jug in the privy, she almost felt like herself again.

She needn't have worried about sneaking.  "Excuse me, m'lady," one of
the maids said, dodging around her with a load of blankets in her
arms.  A steward hurried along behind her with an even taller pile of
blankets.  Further down the hall someone wanted to know where the
cotter pins for the cots were, there was supposed to be a whole bag of
them, while someone else needed someone, anyone, to go and roust that
lazy-bones boy and get him upstairs with a broom *right now* and do
something about the dust mice in this room before they took up arms,
and gracious, could someone please get the window unstuck and get some
air in?

"Whoops! Sorry." Noxy steadied her water jug.

"That's all right, m'lady" the maid said, distractedly brushing at a
few drops that had splashed onto her sleeve.  "Everything all right?"

"I'm fine," Noxy said.  "What's going on?"

The woman shook her head.  "It's the tornado again.  It came right up
to the edge of town, people are saying.  Tore up the ground something
awful, and there's a man been killed.  His Highness has ordered us to
set up a few rooms as a hospital, just in case---" But Noxy was
already gone, pelting down the corridor with the water jug sloshing
forgotten in her hand.

She nearly collided with a couple of soldiers carrying a stretcher at
the bottom of the stairs.  Sergeant Dambu lay on it, her eyes open but
her face so drawn that Noxy gasped.

"'Scuse us, m'lady," the soldier in front said without breaking
stride.  Noxy pressed herself against the wall to let them past.

*???* Charger's wordless question popped into her mind like a raindrop
into a still pond.  His agitation made her pulse race.

*It's all right,* she mind-spoke back, suddenly guilty that her first
thought had been Prince Thokmay and not her cloud. *I'm coming.*

She waited for a gap in the bustle to dart across the entrance hall to
Dolly and Princess Ogmin.  The princess was sitting on a delicate
chair that might have been at home in a drawing room in the royal
palace, but looked lost and lonely against the hewn stone of the
garrison house's walls.  Dolly was doing her best to calm her, but the
princess kept repeating, "What's happening? Where's Lor? I want to go
*home*!"

"What *is* happening?" Noxy asked breathlessly.  "Someone said the
tornado attacked again?"

Dolly quickly filled her in.  "I didn't see it," she finished.  "His
Highness didn't think I should be at the service.  But people are
scared, m'lady.  There's already another of Master Bortja's mobs at
the gate saying the prince ought to do something, though Pilots only
know what they think he can do."

Noxy nodded, then did a half-squat and took the princess's hand.
"Hey," she said.  "Hey, I'm sorry we didn't get to go for our cloud
ride today.  How about we do it tomorrow?  Would you like to do that?"

The princess shook her head and sniffled miserably.  "I don't want to.
I want to go *home*!"

Dolly caught Noxy's eye and shook her head slightly.  Noxy
straightened up, feeling helpless and angry.  "All right.  But you can
change your mind.  I'm going to go have a look at him now.  Um, see
you later."

The brightness outdoors made her eyes squint.  Half a dozen soldiers
and staff were unpacking boxes of dayglass, more than she had ever
seen in one place before, and laying out the pieces so that they could
soak up the afternoon sun.  Others were trundling two-wheeled barrel
carts over to the garrison's pump for filling.  *In case of fire,* she
realized.  And the dayglass would be for extra sentry lanterns, or in
case people had to work through the night.  The garrison was preparing
for a battle, or a siege.

A crowd had gathered outside the main gate once again, but they
weren't chanting the way they had that morning.  Instead, their voices
and faces were more frightened than angry.  This attack had been right
at the city's gates.  What did it want?  Where would the next one be?
And what was the garrison doing about it?  What was the *prince* doing
about it?

When Noxy caught sight of him, the prince was arguing with Sergeant
Gyalpa.  Manpa and Jinpa stood next to him, eyes on the crowd and the
rooftops like sailors watching for signs of a storm.

The prince stopped mid-sentence when he saw Noxy.  "We'll discuss this
later," he told Sergeant Gyalpa curtly.

"Yes sir." The sergeant saluted stiffly, his mustache bristling like
an angry cat's tail, and marched away without so much as a nod to
Noxy.

"And you two---give us some space, please."  His bodyguards exchanged
glances, then stepped back a couple of paces.

"What was that all about?" Noxy asked.

The prince shook his head.  "Nothing.  I take it you've heard about
the attack?"

Noxy nodded.  "They said someone was killed again."

"A smuggler.  One of the town guard recognized him right away.  He was
caught last year scavenging in the Blight, but escaped."

"I'm sorry," Noxy said, feeling inadequate.

The prince's mouth twisted.  "Me too.  He probably fell out with
whoever is behind this, and I would very much like to have had a
chance to talk to him."

Noxy hesitated.  How did you ask someone if they had heard you in
their mind?  More importantly, what if you asked and they hadn't?
What if she'd been dreaming?

As she opened her mouth, not knowing what she was going to say, the
prince cut her off.  "But right now I suppose you want to check on
your cloud?" he asked loudly, glancing significantly at Manpa and
Jinpa and then back at her.

"Um, yes, I should.  Oh, um..."  Without waiting for a reply, the
prince had slipped his arm through hers and set off toward the back
parade square where the makeshift cloud pen stood, pulling her along
with him.

"Talk more later," he said quietly so that only she could hear.  He
squeezed her trapped arm with his for emphasis.  She squeezed back to
signal that she understood, then pulled her arm out of his as
gracefully as she could.  She wasn't sure what she was more flustered
by: the realization that he actually had mind-heard her, or the fact
that they'd practically been holding hands for a couple of heartbeats.

They hadn't gone more than twenty strides before they heard shouts
coming from up ahead.  "Now what?" the prince asked, exasperated.

The shouts were followed by the rattle and crash of loose tiles
falling from the roof and shattering on the cobblestones.  Startled,
Noxy jumped back and looked up just in time to see a hairy figure
bound across the garrison house roof.  "Mope!" the prince shouted,
taking his arm from Noxy's to cup his hands around his mouth.  "Mope,
what are you doing?"

The troll grabbed hold of a drain and half-slid, half-clambered down,
keeping one arm close to his chest the whole time.  "Your Highness,"
Mope wheezed as he reached the group.  "Please, take him."  He handed
the small furry bundle he'd been cradling to the prince.

It was a raccoon.  As the prince took him, he opened his eyes.  "Your
Highness," he mumbled, struggling for a moment and then lying limp
again.

"What---?" the prince asked.

Mope shooked his head.  "They've gone mad, Your Highness.  The Charter
mob, Master Bortja and all.  They're saying the tornado is the
Gifted's fault, that Apple Bridge won't be safe 'til they're all sent
out.  They nearly caught this poor lad, and if they had..."  He shook
his head and turned back toward the drain pipe.

"Wait!"  Noxy caught hold of his arm.  "You're bleeding!"

The troll looked down at the matted fur on his shoulder.  "Oh.  Yes, I
suppose I am.  I'll see to it when I return, I promise.  I have to go
fetch his partner."

It only took the troll a moment to climb back to the roof.  Even
before he reached it, the prince was shouting for someone to come and
look after the exhausted raccoon.  A soldier that Noxy vaguely
remembered seeing hurried over, did a double take when he realized
what the prince needed, then picked up the raccoon gingerly, as if he
was a stranger's baby.

"That poor thing," Noxy said.  "I hope he's going to be all right."

"Oh, he'll be along by fine," the soldier reassured her.  "Just out of
breath, is all.  No broken bones.  Isn't that right?"

The raccoon nodded.  "Quite.  I'd be all right on my own feet now, if
you don't mind?"  The soldier set him down gently.  The raccoon licked
his paw and began combing tangles out of his fur.

The prince squatted down to bring his head to the raccoon's level.
"Did you see who was chasing you?"

The raccoon shook his head.  "I'm sorry, Your Highness, I was too busy
running to pay much attention."

The prince's next question was interrupted by a shout from the nearby
gate.  "Your Highness!  Over here!"

Mope had returned, but instead of traveling by rooftop he had come
through one of the alleys behind the garrison house with the second
raccoon in his arms and a now-familiar skinny figure in tow.
"Quickly, man!" the troll barked as a stone clattered off the wall
over his head.

As the narrow gate swung open, Mope pushed Muddh through.  Soldiers
pulled the gate shut and re-locked it behind the troll.  The raccoon
in his arms leaped to the ground and darted over to his companion to
rub noses.

"Oh, thank you, Your Highness, thank you, I don't know what would have
happened to us, I was so worried," the skinny trader babbled.

"Stop."  The prince raised his hand to cut Muddh off.  "Take a breath.
Tell me what happened."

The story came out in fits and interruptions.  Everyone had been
running every which way when the tornado attacked, his friends had
very nearly been trampled, so they'd ducked into an alley, well, more
like a lane, it turned out, because there were people there, and some
of them had been at the pump, and they hadn't liked the idea of
getting their water from the stable, not that he was criticizing the
prince of course, that was a very regal thing to have done, the sort
of thing that people would remember, and it would certainly have
taught them a lesson, except, well, there they all were, and there
were the raccoons, and someone started shouting, and someone else
started throwing rocks, so they ran, but that just brought the crowd
after them, and if the good troll hadn't seen them, well, they were
scared, the people, not the raccoons, though of course they were
scared too.  They were scared, and scared people always looked for
something to take out their fear on.

"The worst of it is, Your Highness, the absolute worst of it is,
everyone knows the Gifted can't do magic, so how they thought a couple
of raccoons were making that tornado dance their tune is a mystery to
me."  The trader bobbed his head.  "A complete mystery."

The prince clapped Mope on his unbloodied shoulder.  "Well done," he
said quietly.

The troll nodded.  "Thank you, Your Highness.  But I'm afraid this is
a long way from over."

"I dare say you're right," the prince sighed.  "I'm afraid we'll have
to finish our conversation later," he said to Noxy.

"Of course."  She squatted down the way she had seen the prince do.
"Do you need somewhere to stay tonight?  Until things calm down?"

The raccoons conferred briefly.  "Yes, m'lady," the larger one said.
"We'd be most grateful."

"And what about you?" the prince asked Muddh.

The trader shook his head.  "I'll be along right, Your Highness.  Just
wait along a bit for the crowd to lose interest, then I ought to be
getting back to Rust.  She'll worry, me being away so long."

"She'd be welcome to stay here as well if she's worried about her
safety---or yours."

Muddh shook his head again.  "She'll be all right, Your Highness.
Folk don't mess along with a bear as easy as they do with a raccoon."

*The garrison house was still that night when a quiet voice only
Princess Ogmin could hear told her to get dressed. She was
puzzled---it was dark outside, and Dolly was still snoring next
door---but the princess was used to being puzzled.  The itchy tingling
under the little wooden ring on her right hand bothered her, but only
a little.*

*Quietly, because the voice told her that it was important to be
quiet, she put on her clothes and opened her door as slowly and as
quietly as she could.  She wasn't surprised by the two raccoons
waiting for her, their dark eyes reflecting light from the tiny
dayglass lantern one carried in its paw.*

*The raccoons shepherded her down the corridor to the narrow staircase
the staff used when they were emptying chamber pots or simply wanted
to stay out of sight.  One scampered ahead to sniff for trouble while
the other stayed with her.  She yawned.  It was definitely past her
bedtime.  She should---and then the ring tingled and the "should"
evaporated.

"All clear," the lead raccoon hissed.  Princess Ogmin descended one
careful step at a time, brow furrowed in concentration.  She didn't
know why it was so important for her to be quiet, only that it was.*

*The servants' quarters were two floors down, in the upper basement.
One more flight brought them to the lower basement.  The air was cool
and damp.  She shivered suddenly.  The walls were lined with barrels
of beer and rounds of cheese half as tall as she was. String sacks of
yellow and purple onions hung from the ceiling, a rack of old hunting
horns standing forgotten between them.  A cat darted out of a corner,
froze a moment to study her, then disappeared into the shadows again
when the raccoons chittered at it.*

*A blackened grate guarded an old fireplace in the far wall.  It
looked as though it hadn't been opened since before she was born, but
when she pulled on it, it swung toward her with a rusty squeak.  The
first raccoon trotted into the darkness.  When the princess hesitated,
the second one said, "Go on, go ahead," raising his lantern a little
higher to give her more light.*

*She had to go on hands and knees.  It scared her.  So did the
darkness---the little lantern behind her cast just enough light for
her to see how small the passageway was.  Her brother or Noxy would
have wondered who made it and when.  Was it a secret escape route from
the time when the Ninety Kingdoms were constantly at war with each
other?  Or had some patient thief dug into the stone one painstaking
chip and scrape at a time to loot the garrison house's stores?  But
she wasn't her brother, or Noxy, and all the ring let her think was
"keep going, keep going".*

*Finally she saw light ahead.  She crawled toward it, scraping her
hands on the rough stone, tears on her cheeks.*

*The tunnel dead-ended in the bottom of a well so shallow that when
she stood up, her shoulders and head were out of it.  The raccoons
climbed her dress to get out, making her shriek.  She clapped her hand
over her mouth---she had to be quiet, it was so important to be quiet,
the ring was telling her how important it was and she needed to
listen.*

*"Well, come on," rumbled the mound of fur in front of her.  "Out you
get."  The princess struggled for a moment, unable to find purchase
for her feet, then braced her elbows and wriggled like an itchy snake
until she could bend forward at the waist and drag herself the rest of
the way out.*

*She was in a warehouse.  As she got to her feet and wiped dirt from
her hands onto her skirt, a crow fluttered down from the rafters.
"All clear outside," it squawked.*

*"Good."  The skinny man who had been sitting on a cart beside the
bear swallowed the last of the bread he had been gnawing on.  "You've
been a very good girl.  Now, come here.  Let's have a look at you."
The ring on the princess's finger tingled in time with his words.*

*Eyes downcast, Princess Ogmin obeyed.  The skinny man pushed his
crushed hat back on his head and lifted her chin so that he could look
into her eyes.  "Excellent," he whispered.*

*Something knocked softly against the back wall of the warehouse.  A
small gray head poked through the rear door.  "We're ready when you
are," the raccoon said.*

*"Excellent," the skinny man repeated.  "Now, why don't you sit along
by here?  Or better yet..."  The skinny man frowned.  "How by you take
a lie down instead, hm?"*

*"Where are we going?" the princess asked, lying down in the back of
the cart. Something told her she ought to be afraid, but every time
the thought started to form, her ring drove it away.  Even when the
skinny man put a blanket over her and laid a few rolls of cloth across
the cart so that she was completely hidden, the tingling dissolved the
thought.*

*"Not far," the skinny man lied as he hitched the bear to the wagon.
"Not half far.  But it'll go along faster if you sleep."*

*The princess closed her eyes.  A moment later her breathing slowed.
Humming to himself, the skinny man climbed swung himself up onto the
seat of the wagon.  The bear lumbered to her feet with a snort and set
off, the crow circling overhead.  The raccoons pushed the door closed
and then raced each other down the street to catch up with the wagon,
leaping into the back and trotting across the sleeping princess as if
she was just another roll of cloth.*

## Chapter 8: Missing!

Noxy woke to a frantic knock.  "His Highness needs you downstairs,
m'lady," the maid said, hurrying away before Noxy could answer.  She
pulled on her clothes and boots and followed.

The garrison house was in uproar. Soldiers were looking in closets and
under beds, while the servants tried frantically to remember if they
had forgotten about any secret passages.  Boots thundered on stairs,
while wooden shoes went *clack!  clack! clack!* through every room and
hallway.

Pacing back and forth in the entrance hall, the prince snarled, "She
can't have just turned into a frog and hopped away! Can she?"

"It's doubtful, Your Highness," Sergeant Dambu said, her eyes
downcast.  "Magic along by that powerful would probably have woken me.
And even if it din't, it would have given such to my apprentices as
certain."  She was standing, but only just, her face still drawn from
exhausting herself the day before.

"She loves to go down by the docks and watch the river rafts," Dolly
fretted. "She might have fallen in, or...or..."

"Now, mother, I'm sure she's all right." Mope patted her shoulder
awkwardly, even though he looked no less worried than she did.  He
glanced up as Noxy arrived, then spoke to Sergeant Dambu. "All of Her
Highness's belongings are up in her room. Can't you use them to find
out where she's been taken?"

"What makes you think somebody took her?" Prince Thokmay asked.

"Erm, well..." Mope seem flustered for an instant. "Isn't it obvious?
She's never wandered away before, certainly not in the middle of the
night. And the smugglers have grown bolder, Your Highness, you can't
argue with that, not after yesterday. I just thought---well, I just
thought..." He flapped his hands instead of finishing his sentence.

"You could be right," the prince said grimly. "Manpa! *Manpa!* Where
have you---oh, there you are. My compliments to Sergeant Gyalpa, and
he's to send squads north and south along the main road. Have them
knock on every door and ask if anyone saw any strangers last night."

"Sir, I believe he's already sent along some out, sir," the soldier
replied as he saluted.

"Well then have him send some more!"

"Sir!" The soldier saluted again and jogged away.

Prince Thokmay suddenly seemed to notice that Noxy was in her riding
clothes. "I'm glad you're awake," he said curtly. "Is Charger well
enough to fly? You might have more luck spotting her from the air."

"I'll go and look," Noxy said.

"I'll come with you," Mope volunteered. "I'm afraid I'm not much use
standing around here." He patted his mother's shoulder again. "I'm
sure she'll be all right," he said softly. "No-one would hurt her."
Dolly put her own hand on her son's and tried to smile.

Charger was already floating a few feet above the ground in his pen, his
edges bunching and clumping with agitation.  He could sense how
worried she was, Noxy realized, even without her mind-speaking to
him. "Do you really think the smugglers have kidnapped the princess?"
she asked Mope as she ran her hands over the cloud's flank to soothe
him.

"I can't say that I know," Mope replied. He tugged his lower lip for a
moment, then put his hands back down at his sides in embarrassment
when he noticed Noxy watching him. "They might have done, they might
have done. Oh, I hope she's all right. My mother would---well, it
would be terrible, that's all."

Noxy patted Charger's flank again.  Years ago, her mother had shown her
that if you looked straight at something in the dark, you probably
wouldn't see it, but if you looked away, it would show up in the
corner of your eye.  Whatever strange ability she had seemed to work
something like that.  If she tried to feel Charger's injury, nothing
happened.  If she let her mind wander, she could---it was almost like
stubbing her toe against it.

She frowned and shook her head.  There would be time to explore what
she could do later.  "He's still not completely healed," she told
Mope, "But he can take us up as long as we don't push him too
hard. Come on!" She grabbed a double handful of cloud and levered
herself up onto Charger's back.

"Um..." Mope hesitated.

Noxy lay down flat and stretched out her arm. "Hurry up!"

The orangutan hesitated a moment longer, then sighed and took the
offered hand and clambered to sit beside Noxy. He swallowed loudly as
Charger began to rise.

"Keep your eyes peeled," Noxy told him. "No, closer to the edge. Don't
worry, Charger won't let you fall."

They cleared the rooftops a moment later.  "Do you see anything?" she
asked.

"Only the insides of my eyelids," the orangutan told her. Taking a
deep breath, he opeed his eyes and looked down. "What am I supposed to
be looking for?"

"Anything," Noxy said. "Anything at all."

They flew in a slow circle over Apple Bridge, scanning the town below
for some sign of the missing princess. She wished she had the eagle
eye that Ulfmaerr had given her grandmother. The old magician had
claimed it wasn't magic, but when Noxy had looked through the polished
brass tube, with its twin pieces of curved glass, she had been able to
count the leaves on trees on the other side of the valley.

"Look!" Mope said excitedly. "Over there!"

Noxy tried to follow his pointing finger. "Where? What do you see?"

"Those soldiers---they've got someone with them! And they're heading
straight for the house. They must have found something!" Sure enough,
two uniformed soldiers were hurrying back to the garrison house with a
third man on a stocky pony between them.

Noxy leaped nimbly off Charger as they touched down and raced across the
courtyard without waiting for Mope to dismount.

"What's happened?" the prince demanded. "Did you find her?"

"No, but someone's coming up the road," Noxy said breathlessly.  A
heartbeat later the door banged open. Sergeant Gyalpa strode in with
two soldiers and a middle-aged man with long, greasy hair behind him.

"Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa saluted. "This is Dobchang. He says
he saw a bear pulling a wagon out of town after moonfall last night."

"That's right, Your Highness," the man said, nodding vigorously. "It
was huge, it was, almost as big along as the wagon."

"Did you see who was in the wagon?" the prince demanded.

"Just a fellow from along around the market," Dobchang said
helplessly. "I don't know his name, but I been see him often
enough. Skinny as a rake, he is."

"That's Muddh!" Noxy exclaimed. "He was in the market!  He gave the
princess some ribbon---"

"---and a ring," the prince finished. He thumped a fist on the
wall. "He even *told* us it was magical!"

"Now, a moment, Your Highness, a moment," Mope cautioned. "You're
letting feeling run ahead of logic. What did we study last---"

"This is not a time for lessons!" the prince snapped. He glared at the
troll for a moment, then unclenched his fists and said, "I'm sorry.  I
shouldn't have yelled. What were you going to say?"

"I was just going to say that we don't actually know whether this pair
has anything to do with your sister's disappearance," Mope replied
quietly. "Perhaps they wanted to be on the morning ferry at Two Pear
Crossing.  Or wanted to, um, to circumvent the gate inspection traders
are usually subject to?  It could mean nothing."

Everyone was silent. "I'm---I'm sorry for bringing you bad news, Your
Highness," Dobchang finally said awkwardly.

The prince shook his head. "No, you've been very helpful. The sergeant
here will see to it that you are rewarded."

The man drew himself up. "There's no need for that, Your Highness.
Helping you out, that's reward enough."

The prince nodded slowly. "Very well. But I hope you'll accept my
gratitude." He held out his hand.  Dobchang hesitated, then shook it.

As one of the soldiers showed him out, a smile twitched at the corner
of the prince's mouth. "Back in the capital, he'd spend the rest of
his life telling everyone a prince shook his hand," he said to Noxy.
"Around here, he'll spend the rest of his life telling everyone how it
wasn't such a big deal."

"Excuse me, Your Highness," Sergeant Dambu interrupted, "But you said
that the man in the market gave Her Highness a ribbon."

"Yes, a blue one," the prince confirmed bitterly. "I thought he was
just trying to earn some royal favor."

"Do you still have it?" Sergeant Dambu asked.

The prince raised his eyebrows at Dolly. "I think so," she said. "Yes,
I'm sure of it, it's upstairs on the princess's dresser."

"If it could be brought down, I might be able to use it to find the
princess," Sergeant Dambu said. Noxy could hear the reluctance in the
magician's voice.

Dolly didn't need any more urging. As she trotted up the stairs the
sergeant called out, "And if Highness's hair brush could be brought
down as well, it might also be useful." She turned to one of the
soldiers standing beside her. "Jinpa, see if you can find my
apprentices. Have them meet me in the front courtyard in ten minutes."
With a slight bow of her head to the prince, she added, "If you will
excuse me, Your Highness? I need some time to prepare."

"Of course," the prince said. "Thank you."

As she walked away, Sergeant Gyalpa observed gruffly, "Finding Her
Highness could take a lot out of her."

"Magic always does," the prince replied, staring down the hallway at
Sergeant Dambu's back.

Ten minutes later a dozen or more people stood by the water trough in
the front courtyard of the garrison house. Some of the soldiers had
put on their armor, as if they expected an invasion. Noxy spotted one
with a coil of rope slung across his chest like a sash.

Sergeant Dambu's two apprentices, both newly-recruited soldiers from
Apple Bridge, watched her nervously as she took the rolled-up ribbon
from Dolly and set it on a small piece of wood. "You have to be
careful to put the fresh-cut end on the inside," the sergeant said,
whether to the apprentices or herself Noxy couldn't tell. "It's easy
to forget that, but if you do, the spell works backwards, and tells
you where the thing you're looking for *isn't*."

She put the block of wood in the water, then waited until it stopped
bobbing up and down. Once it settled, she unwound a few strands of
hair from Princess Ogmin's hair brush and put them on another block of
wood.  "Make sure nothing dangles," she said. "See? Nothing in the
water to mix everything up." This block went in at the trough's other
end.

"Now..." Sergeant Dambu took a deep breath, then let it out with a
whoosh. The two blocks suddenly started speeding toward each other,
moving so quickly that they each raised a small wake. They met in the
middle of the trough with a *click!*

Sergeant Dambu nodded. "She's with whoever has that roll of ribbon,"
she said.

"Can you tell us where that is?" the prince asked, trying to keep his
voice level.

Sergeant Dambu nodded. "The green box," she said to one of her
apprentices. "We'll try the easy way first."

The apprentice opened the box. Inside, a dozen ordinary-looking stones
lay in a tray, each with a neat hand-written label pasted beside
it. The apprentice set the stones one by one on the edge of the
trough, spacing them out as evenly as he could. As he did so, Sergeant
Dambu took out the block with Ogmin's hair on it and handed it to her
other apprentice.

"But---" The other apprentice looked confused. "Won't it be more
accurate to look for Her Highness, rather than the ribbon?"

"I think I know what I'm doing," Sergeant Dambu told her. "Of course,
if you'd like to repeat the test the other way yourself..."

The apprentice swallowed. "No thank you, ma'am," she said. She stepped
away from the trough.

"Ready here, ma'am," the first apprentice said. Sergeant Dambu nodded
her head, then took another deep breath.

Nothing happened, and then nothing, and then the block of wood started
moving toward one side of the trough. When it hesitated, Sergeant
Dambu said, "Take away the middle stone. No, not that one, the
*middle* one, to your left!"

As soon as the apprentice did so, the block of wood nosed toward a
flat, blue-gray piece of slate. When it bumped against the side of the
trough, the sergeant's shoulders slumped. "That's it," she said
hoarsely. "What does the label say?"

"The west side of Carmick Hill, ma'am," the apprentice replied. His
eyes widened. "She's in the Blight!"

Dolly and Noxy gasped. Sergeant Gyalpa closed his eyes, then opened
them again. "Don't worry, Your Highness," he said. "We'll find her."

"That's right," the prince said distantly, his eyes on Sergeant Dambu.
"We'll find her." He blinked suddenly, then nodded. "And we'll find
who took her. Sergeant, I want every soldier you have on a horse in
fifteen minutes. Full armor, and overnight packs. Manpa! Manpa,
where---there you are. Lay out my armor, and see whether we have any
recent maps of that part of the Blight."

As Sergeant Gyalpa and the other soldiers hurried away, the prince
turned back to Sergeant Dambu. "Thank you," he said. "I hope... I hope
it didn't take too much."

The sergeant sighed. "Do you remember your tenth birthday party?" she
asked. Before the prince could answer, she added, "I don't, not any
more." She straightened up, but didn't raise her eyes. "With your
permission, Your Highness, I'd like to go and rest for a while. I
think my apprentices know enough field magic to take care of whatever
you might need."

"Of course," the prince said. "Take all the time you need."

## Into the Blight

Noxy hadn't realized just how many soldiers were in Apple Bridge until
she saw them all standing at attention in rows in the front courtyard.
She started counting, but stopped when Mope said, "Eighty, plus
Sergeant Dambu and her two apprentices, and Erasmus over there. He's
not part of the troop's regulation fighting strength any more, not
since he lost that leg, but he keeps the horses happy."

The prince stood in front of his troops with Sergeant Gyalpa beside
him. He looked relaxed to Noxy, but if she had been closer, she would
have been able to see that he was drumming his fingers on the hilt of
his sword. His plumed helmet made him look older, and stern. The
yellow feathers on its crest, and the yellow ribbons on his sleeve,
reminded her of how Sergeant Dorbu had looked the day he had arrived
in Stale, four years ago. For a moment she felt a lump in her
throat.

At a nod from Sergeant Gyalpa, Prince Thokmay stepped forward. "You all
know where we're going," he said loudly, deliberately roughening his
voice so that it wouldn't break. "And you all know why, and what we
might run into. If any of you would rather spend a year in the
galleys, now's the time to say so." He waited a moment. "Very well,
then.  Sergeant?"

"Your Highness?"

The prince waved at the men standing to his right. "These four squads
will come with us. We'll leave the other four here with Sergeant
Dambu."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant replied.

"Dismiss the troops," the prince ordered.

The sergeant straightened up. "Atten*tion!* Saaaa*lute!*" As one, the
soldiers thumped their right fist against their chest and roared
"Gandan preserved!". The sergeant led those the prince had selected
toward the stables, while the others split off in twos and threes to
return to their duties.

The prince walked across the cobblestone courtyard to Mope and Noxy,
tucking his helmet under his arm as he did so. He ran his fingers over
his short, wiry hair as if to dry it. "How did I do?" he asked Mope,
his voice cracking.

"Well enough, I think, Your Highness," the orangutan reassured him.

"Are you sure it's wise to take so few, Your Highness?" a soft voice
asked from behind Noxy. She jumped, startled. Sergeant Dambu was
standing behind her. "It is, after all, your sister."

"My father would want me to deal with this like a soldier," the prince
said to her evenly, "Not like a frightened child. Anything could
happen if I leave too few here to guard the town." He studied the
magician for a moment. "Are you...all right?"

Sergeant Dambu nodded. "Yes, Your Highness. At least, I will be. But
please, take both of my apprentices. I think I'll be able to take care
of whatever might happen here in your absence."

"Of course," the prince said. "Thank you." He turned to Noxy. "I'm
sorry to run away like this," he said, trying to smile as his voice
broke on the word 'run'. "I hope you understand."

"Of course," she said. On a sudden impulse she stepped toward him. His
eyes widened. She hesitated, her sudden courage gone, then settled for
punching his arm gently. "Blue skies, and a safe journey," was all she
said.

It took the prince until the middle of the afternoon to reach the
Blight. The squad at the rear would speed up to gallop past the
others, then slow to a trot once they were in front to let the next
squad ride past. The prince tried to stay calm, and not think about
what might be happening to his sister, but every time he rode past
Sergeant Gyalpa he couldn't help but ask, "Anything?" Every time, the
sergeant said, "Nothing, Your Highness."

There were no markers on the edge of the Blight, no walls or signs to
show where the magically-poisoned land began. Prince Thokmay only
realized they were in it when he saw a patch of flowers that had been
turned into glass. He turned in his saddle to stare, then heard a
crunching sound underneath him as his horse stepped on some grass that
had been transformed the same way.

"You'll want to watch out for that, Your Highness," Manpa
said. "Bucket's hooves are tough, but they're not so tough that they
can't be cut."

"I'll be careful," the prince promised. He looked around. "I haven't
seen any birds for a while."

"Nor you won't, Your Highness. There's not many that'll come here that
weren't born here. Same as the people, like."

The prince nodded. "I can understand why. Come on, let's keep
going. It will be dark soon, and we're still four miles from the
hill."

The further they road, the bleaker the land became. Scraggly
blackberry bushes hunched down when they heard the soldiers
approaching, while the knee-high grass had a metallic green sheen,
like an summer fly's body, and made a scraping sound like rusty
scissors when the wind brushed over it. The few trees they passed were
stunted, and the apples hanging from them were blackened, or bloated
to the size of pumpkins. Even the sky above them was somehow
twisted. It seemed normal enough when Prince Thokmay looked straight at
it, but he kept seeing swirls of color sweep through it out of the
corner of his eye.

They came up over a small rise and saw a wooden 'X' propped up on
either side of the road. Each was tall as a mounted man's head, and
the rain had long since washed away whatever paint might once have
been on them.  The prince swallowed as he rode between them. He knew
from the soldiers' stories that these markers had once stood at the
edge of the Blight. Now they were two hours' ride inside it.

The sun had sunk into the horizon like a rotten peach into mud when
one of the soldiers from the lead squad came galloping back to the
prince.  "Your Highness!" he shouted. "There's men up ahead, lots of
'em. The sergeant says to go slow."

"Understood," the prince said crisply. "Tell Sergeant Gyalpa that
we'll be with him as quickly as we can." The soldier turned and
galloped back the way he'd come. The prince drew his sword and laid it
across his lap. Around him, his soldiers did the same, making much the
same sound as the metal grass had made. He took a deep breath, held it
for a second, then spurred his horse to a trot.

Prince Thokmay expected to find the smugglers waiting at the top of a
hill, or on the far side of a stream. His teachers had told him over
and over again how important it was to make use of whatever defenses
the ground offered. Instead, they were gathered around the stump of
what must have once been an enormous tree. Eight or nine were mounted
on mean-looking horses, while twice that number with spears and swords
were on foot beside them.

The prince reined in his horse next to Sergeant Gyalpa, about a
hundred yards away from the smugglers. "Is that your man Muddh, Your
Highness?" the sergeant asked, pointing to the skinny figure atop the
only one of the smugglers' horses that looked like it had eaten a
decent meal in the last month.

"That's him," the prince said. "Do they have bows?"

"Not that I can see, Your Highness. Jinpa! Can you see any archers
among them?" the sergeant called.

The soldier squinted for a moment, then called back, "No, sergeant,
not a one."

Sergeant Gyalpa studied the smugglers a moment longer. "I don't like
it, Your Highness," he said. "There's forty of us, all mounted,
against two dozen of them, and most of theirs are on foot. Why are
they just waiting for us?"

"There's only one way to find out," the prince said, hoping he sounded
braver than he felt. He started to spur his horse forward, but before
he could, Sergeant Gyalpa backed his own mount into the prince's way.

The sergeant glanced around, then sidled his horse closer to the
prince so that their heads were only a couple of feet apart. "You've
not been in a battle before, have you, Your Highness? Not with a sword
in your hands."

The prince shook his head. "No, sergeant. I don't suppose you'd call
what happened at Stale a battle."

The sergeant nodded. "Right, then I'd be grateful if you'd stay close
to me, Your Highness, and hang back if there's any excitement. Your
father would have my ears off if I let you get killed by a bunch of
featherless ducks like this lot."

"Yes, sergeant." The prince cleared his throat. "Shall we?"

The soldiers spread out as they rode forward. They were still about
fifty yards away from the smugglers when Muddh raised his
arm. "Hello, hello!" he called. "So glad you could come."

"I am Thokmay Gandan-o Prince," the prince said loudly, hoping that his
voice wouldn't crack, and that he would be brave if battle came. "I am
looking for my sister, the Princess Ogmin. We fear she has been
abducted."

The man on the ground beside Muddh was wagging a finger slowly at the
soldiers. He frowned and tugged at Muddh's pantleg and said something
that the prince couldn't hear.

Muddh straightened up and frowned in turn. "Where are the rest of
your troops?" he asked. "It's such a nice day, I hope they're not
cooped up washing dishes." A few of his men laughed.

"Never mind the dishes," the prince demanded. "Do you know what has
become of Her Highness?"

"Oh, yes, the princess," Muddh called back. "About this tall?" He put
his hand up around his chin, palm flat. "Long hair?"

"What have you done with her?" the prince demanded.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," the smuggler said. "Just given her a haircut."
The men around him started to laugh. One of them reached over and
picked something up off the stump.

"Looks like... braids, Your Highness," Manpa said, squinting again.

"Yes, they're braids," Muddh said, as though he'd been able to hear
the soldier even though there were fifty yards between them. "Show
them what else you have, Harry."

The smuggler put down the cut-off braids, and held up a roll of blue
ribbon. "You do recognize it, yes, Your Highness? Eighteen, yes, it
was eighteen pence a handspan, wasn't it?" The men around him laughed
again, harder.

Sergeant Gyalpa swore under his breath. "We've been tricked, Your
Highness," he said. "They must've known we'd use magic to find the
princess."

"Yes, well, it only seemed reasonable," Muddh called. This time the
prince was sure that the smuggler had heard them. "I thought of
pulling out her fingernails too, in case you tried to use clippings
instead of hair, but I was sure you'd keep too a neat a house for
that."

"If you've hurt her---" the prince choked.

"Oh no, no, no," the smuggler protested. "*I* would never hurt an
innocent child---not unless I had to, of course. But we don't even
*have* the princess, do we?" He twisted around in his saddle to look
at his men. "Do we?"

"No," they said, and "Nawp," and "Uh uh."

"What do you want?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked loudly.

The smile dropped from Muddh's thin face. He spurred his horse
forward a few paces. Prince Thokmay noticed that he was holding his
mount's reins in his right hand, and something else in his lap with
his left. "I want you and your troops to leave Apple Bridge," he
said. "By tomorrow. For good."

The prince scowled. "You know we can't do that."

The smuggler beamed. "Of course you can---you're a prince! Well, half
a prince these days, from what I hear, but a prince nonetheless."

"He can't be serious, Your Highness," Sergeant Gyalpa muttered. "Even
if we did leave, the king would have half his army down here before
the harvest started."

The prince nodded. "Why should we leave Apple Bridge?" he said in a
normal tone of voice. "If you don't have my sister, what reason would
we have?"

"You might do it just to be friendly," Muddh said, then snickered.

The prince shook his head. "I'm sorry, but I don't think I want to
have a friend like you. Even if I did, I couldn't oblige you. Apple
Bridge is part of Gandan."

"Not for long," Muddh said lightly. He picked up a small bag that was
hanging from his saddle horn. "Not for very long at all."

"It's magic!" one of the apprentices shouted. "I can feel it!"

"Gandan!" Sergeant Gyalpa bellowed. He dug his heels into his horse.
The soldiers around him shouted, "Gandan and the dawn!" and charged.

Muddh paused for just a moment, watching them come at him with a
satisfied look on his face. Then he undid the string that held the bag
closed and shook it out. A terrible roaring sound filled the prince's
ears as a tornado came whirling out of the bag.

## I Know the Bear

Noxy watched Prince Thokmay and the soldiers ride away with an empty
feeling in her stomach, as if the bottom of the world had dropped
away.  Unable to think of anything better to do, she went back in the
house and up the stairs to Princess Ogmin's room. She told herself
that she was going to see whether she could cheer Dolly up. If she had
been a few years younger or older, she would have known that she was
really looking for some cheer herself.

As she walked down the polished wooden floor toward the princess's
room, she heard muffled voices ahead. She slowed down. One of them was
Mope's, and the other was Dolly's. She hesitated. The door wasn't
actually closed, not all the way, she told herself. It wouldn't really
be eavesdropping...

"---ighness what you know. If you don't, I will!" she heard Dolly say
angrily. "Who knows what she could do to the princess?"

"Nothing half as bad as what *they'll* do to *her* if they even
suspect that she has something to do with Her Highness's
disappearance," Mope replied. "You know how people around here treat
us, what they think of us. She could have nothing to do with this, and
they'd still hunt her down like an animal."

"The prince would never do something like that," Dolly said firmly.

"What about Dambu?" Mope asked. "She'd do it without a second
thought!"

They both froze as Noxy pushed the door open. Mope's rubbery lips were
pulled back in a snarl, exposing more strong, yellow teeth than Noxy
would have imagined he could have. Dolly's face was no happier.

"I wouldn't," she said firmly. "Whatever it is, I wouldn't do it. So
why don't you tell me what's going on?"

"And don't say, 'Tell you what?'," Noxy warned him as he started to
speak.

Mope hesitated. "If you don't tell her, I will," Dolly said, as if
Mope was a badly-behaved child.

The younger orangutan sighed. "I know the bear," he said reluctantly.
"The one from the market, Rust---I recognized her from mother's
description. She's---she's involved in politics. Just like me," he
added, as if daring Noxy to laugh or criticize.

"What kind of politics?" Noxy asked.

"The right kind," Mope said.

"The *noisy* kind," his mother said at the same instant.

Mope sighed. "You'd be noisy too if someone was using my hide for a
rug," he told his mother. "At least, I hope you would." Dolly just
sniffed.

"Rust had a son," Mope said to Noxy. "An ungifted son, just a plain,
ordinary bear cub. Some hunters found him in the woods one day. She
tried to take them to court afterward, but killing an animal isn't
murder."

"So she---she had them tried for *theft*," he continued, with so much
raw bitterness in his voice that Noxy was afraid of him, "But they
wouldn't even give her that. Gifted animals aren't allowed to own
other animals in Gandan."

"Was---was Princess Ogmin one of the hunters?" Noxy asked.

"What? Oh, no, no, Her Highness wouldn't hurt a fly," Mope said
dismissively. "But the king makes the laws in Gandan, and I'm
afraid..."

He paused. "You understand I want the same things as Rust, don't you?"
he asked. "The same things that you, and every other human, has from
birth. I want to be able to run a shop without having a human sign a
license saying that I'm not rabid. I want to be able to buy books
without the bookseller having to check that they're not the banned
list---oh yes, there are still books animals aren't supposed to be
allowed to read," he snorted, seeing the look on Noxy's face. "They
might give us *ideas*."

He picked at a piece of lint on his jacket. "And most of all," he
said, not looking up, "We want our families to be safe, even if
they're not gifted." He glanced up at her. "Does that sound like so
much to ask?"

Noxy didn't know how to answer, so instead she asked, "But what has
all of this got to do with the bear? And the princess?"

Mope shrugged. "I've heard Rust speak at meetings sometimes, the kind
of meetings that humans aren't invited to. She thinks that the only
way to fix the world is to shake it up a bit, and hope that when the
pieces fall into place, they'll fit a bit better than they do right
now. As long as the king is the only one who can change the law, the
only way to change the law is to get the king's attention."

Noxy's eyes had gone wide. "You have to tell Thokmay," she
gasped. "Mope, why haven't you told Thokmay? You're talking about his
*sister*!"

"I'm also talking about the life of every gifted animal in Gandan!"
he snapped back. "Do you have any idea what will happen to us if
people think that a bear has kidnapped a member of the royal family?
Do you?  We'll all be turned into rugs, or roasted for some fat
farmer's dinner."

"Oh, don't be ridiculous," Noxy said. "Just because one bear was---"

"One?" Mope snapped again. "You think it only happened once? My father
worked in a circus. He and my mother did tricks together in towns like
this. When I was born gifted, the circus trainer tried to cut my vocal
cords, so that no-one would know I was gifted. My father stopped
him. He threw himself at that, that piece of trash, and he stopped
him, but he was beaten so badly that he died. The trainer was never
punished, of course. It was just my mother's word against his, and he
was *human*."

When he looked up at Noxy, she backed away involuntarily from the old
hurt and anger in his eyes. "That's why I taught myself everything
there is to know about the law," Mope finished quietly. Dolly had put
her arm around her son, and for once he didn't push it away. "That's
why I'm trying to teach the prince. Even if he'll never be king, he'll
be important. They'll have to listen to him."

Noxy looked away to give Mope a moment to control the tears that were
trying to escape him. A few motes of dust sparkled in the sunlight
that streamed in through Dolly's bedroom window. A small drawing of
the royal family, the kind of thing that street artists turned out by
the dozens on festival days, was in a small frame on the dresser,
beside a cracked old leather cap and a wide-toothed wooden comb with
mother-of-pearl inlay in the handle. She could hear morning birds
whistling at each other outside, and she wished more than anything
that she was back in Stale.

Finally Dolly said wearily, "Mope, we *have* to tell Sergeant Dambu
about Rust. There's no-one else left."

"If she believes us, and I said 'if', she'll have every animal in
Apple Bridge down in the dungeon by nightfall," Mope replied, just as
wearily.  "And you mark my words, half of them will never come out
again."

"Dear, Apple Bridge doesn't have a dungeon," his mother said gently.

"Well then she'll put us on rafts in the middle of the river! Or the
stables! That would probably appeal to her." Mope flapped his hands.
"Whatever she does, it will be very, very bad."

"What if we could prove that it wasn't Rust?" Noxy asked suddenly.

"What do you mean?" Dolly asked.

"Well, if everyone thinks the bear took the princess, but she didn't,
then they'll all be looking in the wrong place. If we can *prove* she
didn't take Princess Ogmin, then we'd still be helping to find the
princess."

"Hmm," Mope mused, pursing his lips. "We would at that, wouldn't we?"
He looked at Noxy shrewdly. "Of course, we'd be doing exactly the same
things we would do if we were trying to prove that Rust *did* kidnap
Her Highness."

"Mm hm," Noxy conceded, "But if it *is* Rust, and if we can find the
princess before anyone else does, then if we get her back, it'll all
come out even---an animal took her, but an animal brought her back."

"In my experience, people rarely do their moral bookkeeping that
carefully," Mope said sourly, but then he nodded his head. "All right.
We'll try to find out if Rust *didn't* take Princess Ogmin." He
glanced at his mother. "That is, if it's all right with you."

"Of course," Dolly said. "I just want to find her. She must be
terrified."

## Attacked

The tornado roared into the sky, doubling in size and then doubling
and doubling again as it poured out of Muddh's bag. "At them!"
Sergeant Gyalpa shouted to the soldiers. "Get in close, or it'll swat
you like ladybugs!"

The soldiers charged, shouting "Gandan! Gandan and the dawn!" The
smugglers shouted curses back. The ones on foot braced the ends of
their spears against the ground, so that the soldiers' horses couldn't
get close, while the ones who were riding horses of their own drew
their swords and dug their spurs into their mounts.

"Stay close, Your Highness!" Sergeant Gyalpa ordered the prince. He
paused, watching where men were going, watching where they weren't,
then shouted, "Haw!" and spurred his horse forward. The prince dug his
heels into his own mount and followed him.

The next few seconds were mad confusion. The soldiers had to ride
around the front rank of smugglers to avoid their spears. As they did
so, Muddh held up the copper hoop he'd been holding in his lap and
shouted commands at the tornado. It twisted and danced across the
ground, then lashed out like a man kicking a ball.

Instead of a ball, though, it connected with a soldier on
horseback. The man's horse screamed as it was lifted into the sky. The
soldier himself dropped out of the saddle onto the ground. His left
leg buckled underneath him as he hit the ground. Before his comrades
could reach him, a smuggler on horseback lunged forward, leaned over
in his saddle, and swung his sword.

An instant later Prince Thokmay saw Manpa and another soldier cut left,
then right, then left again to get in close to the knot of
smugglers. Muddh didn't hesitate. The tornado snatched up the two
soldiers and a smuggler as well and tossed them through the air. They
tumbled like dice.

Sergeant Gyalpa stood up in his stirrups and waved his sword over his
head. "Fall back!" he shouted. "Fall back! We can't get past that
thing!" He watched the melee for a moment in despair, then snarled,
"They can't hear me! Your Highness, we have to get you out of here!"

"No!" the prince protested. "I won't run away!"

"And I won't have a dead prince on my scroll!" the sergeant bellowed
back. "Now don't make me carry you on my shoulders!"

"I will *not* run!" the prince shouted. "Haw!" He dug his spurs deep
into his horse's flanks. The frightened animal bounded forward. Behind
him, Sergeant Gyalpa cursed, then kick his own horse into a gallop as
well.

Prince Thokmay crouched low over his horse's neck and charged straight
at the smugglers. The wind-blown grit stung his eyes. He felt his
horse's hooves pounding on the ground beneath him. The smugglers were
small, small, small, and then suddenly larger and larger as he dodged
behind a startled spearman and swung. His blade bounced off armor. A
spear thrust up past his ear. He ducked and screamed in fear and anger
and swung his sword again---

And suddenly the earth beneath him was churning like the ocean in a
storm. His horse screamed with fear as she lost her footing and
stumbled, neighing with panic as she found her footing again and
leaped toward solid ground. The prince twisted around in his saddle,
just in time to see the spearman he'd just passed sink to his knees in
the turbulent earth.

Somehow Sergeant Gyalpa was beside him. "It's that thing!" he shouted.
"The land---his magic is waking it up! We have to get out of here,
*now*!"

"But what about the troops?" the prince shouted back. He suddenly
realized he was crying.

"They're already falling back, Your Highness. Look!" Sure enough,
everyone was fleeing, smugglers and soldiers alike, as the land roiled
and heaved like a living thing.

"Guard my back!" the sergeant ordered the prince. He spun his horse
around and charged at the smugglers. Most of the spearmen were
struggling to get to their feet. As the horsemen around Muddh tried
to get their panicky mounts under control, Sergeant Gyalpa charged
through them and swung his sword.

The prince saw the sergeant's blade connect with the copper hoop that
Muddh was still struggling to hold high. There was a flash like
lightning.  Muddh and the sergeant both cried out. The hoop flew
through the air. When it hit the ground, the earth splashed like
water. The copper hoop sunk out of sight like a stone thrown into a
murky pond.

The tornado roared in triumph as it felt Muddh's hold over it
break. It pounced on the smugglers like a cat pouncing on a crippled
bird, throwing them this way and that. Prince Thokmay saw Muddh leap
from his horse an instant before the tornado snatched it up. The
smuggler scrambled over to the old tree stump and pulled a man-tall
mirror off the wagon that was still somehow parked there. He propped
the thing against the stump and dove through it an instant before the
tornado snatched it up.

The prince shouted, "Look out!" but it was too late. The mirror
slammed into Sergeant Gyalpa like a stone from a catapult, knocking
him from his horse.

"No!" the prince screamed. He dug in his heels. "No!" His horse
charged forward.

Sergeant Gyalpa tried to stand, but fell again as his knee gave way.
"Go back!" he shouted to the prince. "Go back!"

"Hang on!" the prince shouted back. He pulled his horse up short
beside the sergeant and half-climbed, half-fell out of the saddle.

"No, Your Highness, you have to save yourself!" the sergeant shouted,
pushing the prince's hands away.

The prince grabbed the sergeant's sleeve and pulled him up onto his
good leg. "I've already lost one sergeant," the prince grunted. "I
will *not* lose another! Now climb up on that horse!"

The prince pushed the sergeant up by the rump while the sergeant
pulled himself up into the saddle. A heartbeat later the prince swung
himself up behind him. "*Now* we can run," he said. He smacked the
horse on the rump. The animal didn't need any encouragement. It
galloped heavily away.

Behind them, the tornado picked up Muddh's magic mirror and smashed
it to the ground once again, then whirled off toward Apple Bridge.

## Comes Big Song

Mope and Noxy walked down the main street to the Dog Market, asking at
every shop they passed about the bear Rust. Even when Mope asked the
questions, many of the shopkeepers gave their answers to Noxy. After
that had happened a few times, Mope started letting Noxy do all the
talking. He just stood behind her quietly, then followed her back out
again.

The baker who had sold them beaver tails the day before scowled when
they asked. "A bear? Mm, I remember one down in the market, selling
knick knacks and all. Haven't seen it today, though." He raised his
voice. "Oy, Jokhang! You seen that bear around today? That big old
scruffy one from down the market, with the wagon."

"Can't say I have," Jokhang puffed. He had tied two dozens bricks
together with twine to make a block, and then put two wide cloth
straps around it so that he could carry it like a backpack. He set the
whole thing down with a groan, and wiped his brow. "Why, is that who
took the princess?"

"We just think she might have seen something on the road," Noxy said
quickly. "Since she left last night, I mean."

"Mm, well, I wish I could help," the brickmason said regretfully. "She
was a real smile, she was." Noxy couldn't help but notice how he said
'was' instead of 'is'.

They split up when they reached the market itself. Noxy spoke with the
stern-faced leek woman, who was in her usual place by the
stairs. "Nope, but good riddance," was all she said when Noxy asked
her if she knew where Rust might have gone.

Piqaluujaq clucked his tongue when she asked him. "She is not go here
this day," the Anuat trader said. "The sun, today, and she is gone."

"You mean she left last night?" Noxy asked. Piqaluujaq shrugged. He
glanced around to see if anyone was looking, then reached into the
middle of one of his piles of seal skins and pulled out a small wooden
hoop, crisscrossed with thin leather cords. Bits of red thread were
tied around the cords wherever they crossed. A dark red feather, and
an old piece of bone, dangled on loops of cord from the hoop's bottom.

"My grandmother between days sings with Edward," he confided. "Old,
old song, from sun magic days."

Noxy shook her head in confusion. "I don't understand. Is your
grandmother here? Did she see Edward's ghost?"

The Anuat clucked his tongue again and held out the wooden hoop. "My
grandmother," he explained, pointing at the piece of bone dangling
from it.

Noxy's eyes went wide. "That's...those are from you grandmother?"

"Between days," Piqaluujaq confirmed, nodding. "She sings with Edward.
Between the sun, someone else sings, from where goes away dogs. From
all bent, the land."

Noxy still didn't understand, but then suddenly she did, and her
stomach went cold. "From the Blight?" Noxy gasped. "Someone was using
Blight magic last night? Mope! Mope!"

"Coming!" the orangutan called from two lanes away. Noxy heard a
chicken squawk as the orangutan trod on it. "What have you found?"

She grabbed his arm excitedly. "He says there was Blighted magic here
last night," she hissed, nodding her head at Piqaluujaq. The Anuat
trader had tucked his hoop back out of sight, but he grimaced at
Noxy's words. "His grandmother told him."

Mope looked around. "Is she still here?" he asked. "If someone has
brought something here out of the Blight we should report it, even if
it has nothing to do with Princess Ogmin's disappearance."

"Um, no, I think she's gone now," Noxy said hastily. "But---"

Suddenly Piqaluujaq grunted and winced.

"What's wrong?" Noxy asked. "Are you all right?"

Piqaluujaq looked up at the sky. "Comes big song," he gasped. "Big
angry song. Comes *now!*"

Just as he said it, Noxy heard something crash in the distance. People
looked up, startled or annoyed or afraid, as the town bell started to
ring, *dong, dong, dong, dong*.

"What's happening? What can you see?" Mope demanded, hopping up and
down.

"Nothing," Noxy said, standing on tip-toes. "I can't see anything at
all." All around them traders were hastily packing away their more
precious goods, or throwing cloths or nets over their stalls and tying
them down.

"Well, something must be wrong," Mope fretted. "They wouldn't ring the
bell otherwise. We should go back to the garrison house."

They pushed their way through the crowd. The normal buzz and stir of
the market had been replaced by shouts and frantic haste. Someone
stepped on Noxy's foot. Someone else pushed her hard from behind, and
then a two-wheeled cart strung with ropes of sausages was in her
way. She ducked under its handles, ignoring the curses of the
heavy-set man who was pushing it. Mope scrambled through after her.

"I spoke with some raccoons who do repairs for the rafters' guild,"
Mope puffed as they dodged around braying donkeys and worried
traders. "They didn't want to talk at first, but the younger one
finally admitted that Rust bought a raft from them a couple of days
ago, before you arrived in town. She had them leave it tied up by the
old fishing weir, about an hour's walk downstream." He grabbed Noxy's
arm and tugged. "Come on over this way, it'll be quicker. Anyway,
guess what else they sold her?"

"What?" Noxy asked. Someone shoved someone in front of them. A moment
later a neat pyramid of jars of apple preserve turned into a
sharp-toothed porridge of broken glass and apple sauce on the
cobblestones. Noxy skipped over it, then paused a heartbeat for Mope
to catch up.

"Blankets," Mope puffed. "And biscuits, and apple sauce."

"I don't understand," Noxy said. They had slowed to a walk so that
Mope could catch his breath. The orangutan stopped completely,
wheezing.

"What, would, a, bear, do, with, blankets?" he gasped. "And how, would
she, open, jars?"

Whatever Noxy might have said next was cut off by a long, mournful
howl. It seemed to come from everywhere at once, echoing around them
like a mountain gale. Noxy clapped her hands over her ears and looked
up. There, standing on top of his own statue, was the ghost of Edward
the Dog. It was so solid that the building behind it was only visible
as a dark shadow across its chest.

"ARRRROOOOOOOOOOOO!!!" it howled again, and then someone cried out,
"Up there! Look! It's the tornado! It's coming straight for town!"

"Big angry song," Noxy whispered to herself. She grabbed Mope by the
arm. "Come on! We have to get to the garrison house before it hits!"

They didn't make it. Freed of Muddh's magical control, free at last
from any kind of control at all, the tornado swept down on Apple
Bridge like an angry bull. Noxy heard a crash that went on and on as
the tornado tore shingles off of the roofs of houses and threw them
into the air like pieces of straw. As it whirled up the main road,
Jokhang's new window shattered, the shards of glass transformed into
thousands of flying knives.

"Down here!" Mope shouted. He pulled Noxy into a side alley, then
under a set of stairs. "Hold on!"

Noxy had heard bull clouds thunder at each other, and whole fields of
snow fall in avalanches down the sides of mountains, but nothing as
loud or as furious as the tornado. It lifted the logs from the main
street and used them to batter down the walls of the nearby shops. It
pulled at the statue of Edward the Dog, but when it found that the
statue couldn't be lifted from its column, it battered it with a
wheelbarrow full of bricks until statue and column alike were rubble.

It took the tornado only a heartbeat to reduce the stalls and wagons
in the dog market to kindling. It smashed pots and scattered
carefully-stacked boxes of herbs. It hopped over the wall and danced
on the river, flipping over rafts one by one. The muck and water it
flung into the air fell back on Apple Bridge as muddy rain.

"Where are you going?" Mope cried as Noxy wriggled out from under the
stairs.

"I have to get to Charger!" Noxy shouted. She could barely make herself
heard over the tornado's horrific roaring. "She'll be terrified!"

"But you can't go out in this!" Mope grabbed her ankle and tried to
pull her back under the stairs.

"Let go!" Noxy shouted, kicking at his hand. "I have to get to Charger!"
She twisted around, then slipped her foot out of her boot and
scrambled away before Mope could grab her again.

She was nearly knocked off her feet by the wind despite the shelter of
the narrow alley. She grabbed a nearby wall to steady herself, then
half-stumbled, half-flew down the alley away from the main street.
Behind her she heard Mope shouting, "Noxy, come back! Come back!"  but
she bowed her head and pressed on.

She had almost made it to the alley's other end when the tornado grew
tired of playing in the river and swept back across town toward the
garrison house. She suddenly felt as if she was caught in the current
of a fierce mountain stream. It pulled her forward, faster and faster.

Noxy screamed as she felt herself being lifted into the air. She
stumbled forward a few more steps, then threw her arms around the
railing of the last set of stairs in the alley. The wooden posts shook
in her hands. She could see the railing start to pull free, pulled
sideways further and further by her weight and the fierce wind. She
fell on her knees and tried to hug it, but the wind pulled her feet
out from under her. Something long and heavy, a door or a table,
tumbled past her end over end, like an axe thrown by a giant.

She just had time to think that she would finally find out what it was
like to fly when a big, hairy hand fastened onto her collar. "Don't
let go!" Mope shouted in her ear. The orangutan grabbed the stairs
with his other hand and both his feet. "Whatever you do, *don't let
go!*"

Something fluttered over them like a bird, then crashed to the ground
in the middle of the parade courtyard. "There goes someone's laundry!"
Mope shouted. "And look---there's Sergeant Dambu!"

Noxy turned her head, scraping her cheek against the railing post. Up
above the exit from the alley, she could see that Sergeant Dambu had
somehow climbed onto the roof of the middle wing of the garrison
house.  As Noxy watched, the sergeant stood up and raised her arms.

"Come on, come on," Mope pleaded in Noxy's ear. "Give it all you've
got!"

The sergeant brought her hands together as if she were clapping. A
sharp *crack!* cut through the sound of the tornado's winds. Noxy saw
the tornado jerk as if it had been bitten. It leaped over a house and
swept its tail at Sergeant Dambu.

The sergeant reached up and grabbed the air in front of her, as if she
was wrestling with an invisible opponent. Something pushed her back a
step, and another. Noxy could see the tornado straining to reach her,
held back as if by the invisible hands of a giant. Then Sergeant Dambu
twisted and spun around, whirling her arms in a wrestling throw.

The tornado howled as it flew threw the air, tumbling end over end.
Sergeant Dambu straightened up, raised her arms, and clapped again.
*Crack!* The tornado doubled over.

Sergeant Dambu raised her clasped hands over her head, bracing her
legs like a sailor in a rough sea. She spread her arms wide once more,
then brought her hands together for the third time.

*CRACK! BOOM!* Lightning flashed, and Noxy screamed. The dazzle
blinded her, and the air suddenly tasted like metal.

It took her a moment to realize that the wind was gone, even though
the sound of it still roared in her ears. Mope had to say her name
three times before she heard it.

"Yes, I'm all right," she told him. She suddenly realized that her
arms and back were aching from holding onto the stair railing. As the
orangutan let go of her she scrambled to her feet.

Splintered boards and branches, broken glass and gobs of mud... The
garrison house's parade courtyard was covered with the remains of the
tornado's makeshift toys. Noxy stared at the destruction for a moment,
then tried to shake free of Mope's grasp. "Let me go!" she
protested. "I have to find Charger!"

"Never mind your cloud," the orangutan said. "Where's Sergeant Dambu?"
The magician could no longer be seen on the roof of the old house.

Noxy and Mope limped across the parade courtyard. They were almost at
the door when it flew open and Dolly came running out. She threw her
arms around her son, weeping.

"I'm all right, mother, I'm all right," he said gently. He patted her
back awkwardly for a moment, then reached up and disentangled her
arms.  "Are you?"

"I'm---I'm fine," his mother said. "I just---I thought---"

"I'm fine," Mope repeated. "So is Noxy. But we have to find out what
happened to the sergeant."

"And I have to find out what's happened to Charger!" Noxy said. She
limped as fast as she could toward the door. She was still a few yards
away when a soldier she half-recognized stepped through and blinked in
the afternoon light.

"Are you all right?" he asked. He took Noxy by the shoulders as she
tried to step past him. "Here, let me look at you."

"I'm fine," Noxy said, pushing his hands away. "I have to talk to my
cloud!"

"Do you know what happened to Sergeant Dambu?" Mope asked from behind
her.

The soldier looked grim. "She's collapsed," he told them. "That spell,
whatever it was she did...she just fell down. A couple of the men
carried her to her room. The doctor's with her there now."

Mope hesitated for a moment. "Go see to your cloud," he told Noxy.
"Mother and I will see if there's anything we can do for the
sergeant."

Noxy limped through the house and out into the rear courtyard.
"Charger!" she cried, aloud and with her mind at the same time.

Charger was huddled in a corner. Noxy didn't have to mind-listen to know
how terrified the young cloud was. She stumbled over the rubble that
had fallen into the courtyard and wrapped her arms around a tuft of
the cloud.

"I'm sorry," she whispered, tears stinging her eyes as she stroked the
quivering cloud's flank. "I'm sorry, I should have been here. Are you
all right? Hm? Are you all right?"

"Bad cruel tearing roaring," the cloud whimpered in her head. She
nodded.

"I know," she said. "I'm sorry. I'm sorry. It's gone now."

The last of the sunlight had faded by the time she went back in the
house. She found Mope in the kitchen, sweeping up broken glass with
the cook and two of her assistants.

"How is Sergeant Dambu?" Noxy asked.

Mope didn't look up. "Well enough to not want my company, or my
mother's," he said shortly. He looked up at Noxy with hurt in his
eyes. "But she'll be all right."

"Sergeant! Sergeant!" A soldier came running in from the back alley.
"You two, where's the sergeant?"

"She's upstairs---no, wait, don't go up," Mope said. "She's still
exhausted. What's wrong? What's happened?"

"The old barrel house," the soldier panted. "Down by the dock. The
wall's caved in. There's people inside, we can hear them!"

Mope turned to Noxy. "You go upstairs and tell Sergeant Dambu what we
discovered," he ordered crisply. "And you, take me to the warehouse!"

## Snow

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa stayed on horseback until they were
over the crest of the hill, where the sergeant reined in Bucket so
that the prince could slide off her back. "She'll never be able to
carry both of us, will you, girl?" the prince said, speaking to
Sergeant Gyalpa as much as to the horse. "Eh? Will you, girl?" he
soothed, stroking the horse's neck. The weary animal just snorted.

The prince patted her one more time, then looked up at his companion.
The sergeant's jaw was clenched, and his frown showed pain as much as
anger. "How is your leg?" Prince Thokmay asked.

The sergeant straightened up a bit in the saddle. "Still a mess," he
said. "I don't think it's broken, but the knee is in bad shape. Put me
up against that tree over there, and go and get help. I'll be all
right."

"I think I'd rather have some company," the prince replied lightly.
"Here, drink some of this." He passed his half-empty canteen up to the
old soldier.

As the sergeant drank, Prince Thokmay looked around. The sky above them
was almost dark, but the land was still lit by a soft glow that came
from nowhere and everywhere at once. On one side, the rocky slope led
down to the churning field they had fled, beyond which was Carmick
Hill and the road home. The other side led down to a narrow valley. A
few trees grew near the small stream that ran along the its bottom.

"D'you hear that?" the sergeant suddenly said. "The wind's dying
down."  He passed the canteen back to the prince, who tucked it into a
saddle bag.

"Do you think Muddh put the tornado back in its bag?" the prince
asked.

Sergeant Gyalpa snorted. "Not without that thing he was waving around,
I'll wager," he said, satisfaction getting the better of pain in his
voice for a moment. "I just hope the others are all right."

"Me too," the prince said. He patted the horse once more, then put his
helmet back on. "Come on. I think I see a path down there by that
stream."

They picked their way down the rocky hillside. It was bigger than it
had seemed---it seemed that the further down they went, the further
they had to go. Prince Thokmay walked in front, while Sergeant Gyalpa
rode behind him with the reins in one hand and his sword laid across
his lap.

Neither of them spoke until they reached the floor of the small
valley.  The path turned out to be a narrow dirt road, and the stream
to be so wide that some might have called it a river.

"It's further than I thought," the prince said, looking back the way
they had come.

"It's all like that around here," Sergeant Gyalpa told him. He
gestured with his sword toward a small clump of trees. "Twisted, like
them. Something that looks like it's a hundred yards off can take you
all day to get to. Or you can barely see it, but you ride for five
minutes, and there you are. Sergeant Dambu said it's something to do
with the way magic bends the light, and all." He shook his head. "I
don't pretend to understand it."

"Nor I." The prince pulled the canteen from the saddle bag and gulped
the last of the warm water. "I thought about becoming a magician once,
you know," he suddenly confessed. "After my visit to Stale. I
thought that since I'd already had a taste of it, I might as well make
it my life."

"Why'd you decide against it?" the sergeant asked.

The prince shrugged. "When Barramarrabee---His Majesty's chief
magician---found out, he asked me if I really wanted to spend my life
giving up things I cared about." The prince paused for a moment,
looking along the length of the stream. "When he put it that way, I
had to wonder. I asked him why anyone would ever become a magician."

"And what did he say?"

The prince shook his head. "All he said was that some people don't get
to make as many choices as a prince." He shook out the canteen as he
spoke, and bent over the stream.

"Wait! What are you doing?" Sergeant Gyalpa asked sharply.

The prince glanced up. "Filling the canteen," he said. "We're out of
water."

"Hold it by the strap," the sergeant ordered. "Don't put your hand in
the stream. Just dip the canteen. Yes, like that."

The prince lowered the canteen into the stream. Fat bubbles escaped
from the mouth for a moment, and then the prince said, "What...?"  The
bubbles were trapped under the surface of the stream, as though there
was a thin layer of ice on top of the water.

He tried to lift the canteen from the water. It wouldn't budge. He
lowered it slightly---it went deeper without any resistance. When he
tried to raise it again, it simply wouldn't come up.

"What's going on?" he asked, suddenly more afraid than he had been
during the battle.

The sergeant scowled. "We're in the Blight, that's what," he said.
"Sometimes a stream is just a stream, and sometimes it's a live thing
that'll pounce on you like that tiger your brother has, and
sometimes..." He pointed at the canteen. "Sometimes it's greedy."

"I could have put my hand in there," the prince whispered.

"You could have," the sergeant agreed. "But you wouldn't ever have
taken it out again. You'll probably want to stay out from under those
as well," he added, pointing at the trees up ahead. "They might not be
as smart as the ones around Lake Ormadine, but they can be meaner than
wolverines."

He winced suddenly as Bucket shifted her weight. "Is there anything we
can do for your leg?" the prince asked, not caring that his voice
broke.  "Manpa showed me how to make a splint."

The sergeant nodded, swallowing another pained grunt. "We'll cut your
tent poles in thirds," he said. "And then we'll follow this stream. I
think that way is east---the Trout's off there somewhere. If we can
make it that far, we can get a raft to take us back up to Apple
Bridge."

The prince noticed that the sergeant said 'if', not 'when', but didn't
comment. Instead, he wrestled his pack off Bucket's back, then took a
hatchet from one of the saddle bags. The tent poles did double duty as
braces for the pack. It took him a moment to untie the straps that
held them in place, and then a few moments longer to cut them to
length.

That done, he helped Sergeant Gyalpa get down onto the ground. The
sergeant had to lie down on top of Bucket, then swing his good leg
over her back and slid down into Prince Thokmay's arms, trying as he
did so to keep his good leg underneath him. Bucket whinnied, but did
not step away, as the sergeant first sat, and then lay down, on the
ground beside her. "Just---just straighten it at the knee," the
sergeant gasped. "Yes, like that. Good jo-aagh. No, no, it's all
right. It's all right. Try again. Use your weight. Urgh. Harder. No,
go on, it's going to hurt either way, you might as well---urrrggh."
Sergeant Gyalpa clenched his fists so tightly that the prince heard
one of the joints crack.

"All right, all right," the sergeant gasped a moment later. "That's
straight enough. Put the poles down beside it. You're going to have to
lift m' leg to get the rope under it. Yes, like that. Now, easy, both
hands, just lift---no, no, both hands on my leg, just drop the rope
underneath. Yes. And again. One more. Uuhhh... All right, now tie it
all up. No, tighter than that. Don't worry about cutting off the
blood. No, not like that. Where'd you learn to tie knots? Just cross
it over and---here, let me."

Sergeant Gyalpa had to prop himself up on one elbow in order to sit
up. Prince Thokmay sat back and watched while the sergeant untied and
then re-tied the last knots in the rope that held the splint
together. His hands shook, but his grip was strong.

When it was finally done, he looked up at the prince. "Thanks," he
said.  "You did well."

The prince swallowed. He wanted to lie down in his bed back in Apple
Bridge and sleep for a week, but instead he got to his feet. "Let's
get you back up on Bucket," he said, putting the sergeant's arm around
his neck as the older man struggled up onto his good leg. The sergeant
pulled himself up onto Bucket's back until he was lying on his stomach
in the middle of the saddle. Prince Thokmay helped him swing his good
leg over to the other side of the horse, and then edge forward into
the saddle. When it was done, the sergeant was back where he had been
ten minutes before, but with six roughly-cut lengths of wood tied
around his injured leg to hold it straight.

They set off along the narrow road, the prince walking, the sergeant
riding. Their conversation was sparse: "Watch out, that mud will be
slippery," or "Put those branches on behind me, we can use them for a
fire tonight."

The prince guessed that they had covered four or five miles in about
two hours when Sergeant Gyalpa finally said, "All right, we'll camp
here for the night." The little valley had widened and flattened, so
that there was twenty yards or so of level ground on either side of
the road.  There was grass, too, and a few blackberry bushes, and even
a patch of reeds in the stream.

"Is it safe to let Bucket graze?" the prince asked once the sergeant
was down out of the saddle.

Sergeant Gyalpa shook his head. "Not here," he replied. "You ought to
have some oats and all in your---yes, good, give her that. Anything
she eats from around here will probably poison her, or turn her into a
frog." He tried to smile. "Can you see me riding on frogback?"

"I can see us both riding on one of Noxy's clouds," the prince said,
trying to match the sergeant's light tone. "It'd be softer than that
saddle, and we'd be so high up that all of this would look like
nothing more than a badly-drawn picture."

The sergeant snorted. "Thanks all the same, but I'll take my chances
down here," he said. "I know how to fall off a horse, but falling off
one of those things..." He shook his head.

The prince helped the sergeant onto the ground, then pointed at a
clump of blackberry bushes a few yards from the road. "There are some
branches over there. If you can stack the ones we have, I'll get some
more. That ought to get us through the night."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said.

The prince stopped in his tracks, then turned slowly. The sergeant was
looking at him expressionlessly. "That's the first time you've called
me that since the tornado," the prince said slowly.

"Is it, Your Highness? I'm sorry." The sergeant braced a branch
against the stony ground and leaned on it until it snapped, then set
the two pieces on top of two other, smaller pieces that he had already
laid out.  The result looked like a giant's wooden tic-tac-toe board.

The prince took a deep breath. "I wouldn't mind if you didn't bother
highnessing me, you know."

The sergeant shook his head and broke another branch. "I'm sorry, Your
Highness, but it might be a hard habit to break afterward, and that
wouldn't be a good for the troops."

The prince blinked. "So what's changed from three hours ago?"

The sergeant looked up at him, still without any expression on his
face.  "Three hours ago, I didn't think I'd ever see any of the other
troops again to set a bad example." He broke another branch in
two. "Best get that firewood, Your Highness. I don't think it's going
to get dark, but I can feel the cold coming on."

Prince Thokmay nodded. He had felt the air growing cold as well. He
took the hatchet from Bucket's saddle bag again and walked over to the
blackberry bushes. They rustled slightly as he approached, even though
there was no wind.

"Easy, easy," he said softly. Somehow it didn't seem strange in this
place to be talking to a plant. "I'm not here for you. I just want
those old scraps of wood." He gave the bushes a wide berth, and
started stacking the dried-up old sticks in his arms.

He didn't notice the first flake of snow, or the second. It wasn't
until one landed on his cheek that he looked up and realized that the
air was full of tiny dancing white bits of fluff. "But it's the middle
of summer," he muttered, exasperated. "Even here!" He picked up a few
more pieces of wood and turned around.

The snow was falling faster now, so thickly that he could barely make
out the road. The flakes melted as soon as they touched the ground,
but the air was getting colder by the second. "Sergeant!" the prince
shouted. "Sergeant, can you hear me?"

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant called. He sounded puzzled. "What's
the problem?"

"I can barely see you," the prince said, his voice breaking. In fact,
he couldn't see the road at all.

"What's wrong, Your Highness? Are you all right?" Prince Thokmay heard
the sergeant grunt as he tried to get up.

"No, wait, stay where you are!" the prince called. He brushed a
handful of snow from his hair. "I just can't see through all this
snow."

It wasn't until the sergeant shouted, "What snow, Your Highness?" that
Prince Thokmay felt afraid. He stumbled in the direction that he
thought the sergeant's voice had come from. The snow wasn't melting on
the ground any longer.

"Sergeant!" he shouted. "Sergeant, have you got the fire going?"

"Yes, Your Highness! Can you see it?"

"No! Keep talking, I'll try to get to you!"

"But Your Highness, I can see you!" Prince Thokmay had to strain to
hear the sergeant's voice. The falling snow was muffling
everything. With a shock, the prince realized that the hatchet had
fallen out of his fingers. They had already become numb from the cold.

"Tell me which way to walk!" the prince shouted back desperately.
"Hurry!"

"Straight ahead, Your Highness! No, no, left! Left! That's
right. That's right, straight ahead! No, you're turning again!"

"I am not!" the prince shouted back in frustration. "I'm walking in a
straight line!"

"Stay where you are!" the sergeant shouted. "I'll come and get you!"

"No!" The prince paused for a moment. His teeth were chattering.
Suddenly he had an idea. "Sergeant! Sergeant, can you hear me?"

"Yes, Your Highness!"

"Sergeant, I want you to put out the fire! Right now!" The prince
dropped the armload of wood he was somehow still carrying and took
another few steps through the knee-high snow. He couldn't feel his
feet.

"But Your Highness---"

"Right now!" The prince almost screamed.

There was no sound for a moment, then the sergeant shouted, "It's out,
Your Highness. What now?"

"Just keep talking!" the prince shouted, hoping he had guessed right.
"Just... k-k-keep... t-t-t-talking!"

The prince slogged forward another step, and another. Was the snow
falling a little less heavily? He tried not to think about it. He
remembered his uncle's stories about retreating through a blizzard
from Ax Medicine during the Anuat rebellion thirty years before, then
tried to push them out of his mind as well. Most of the other soldiers
in his uncle's regiment had never seen Garheim-in-Garheim again.

But a few heartbeats later there was no doubt: the snow was easing
off, and the air was warming up. Prince Thokmay shouted, "Sergeant? Am
I headed the right way?"

"Yes, Your Highness. No, wait, turn right. Now go ahead. No, turn
right again, and---hold on, Your Highness, stay right where you are."
Something thumped to the ground a few feet away from the prince a
moment later.

"Can you see that?" the sergeant called. It was a saddle bag, with one
of the tent's stay ropes tied to it. The prince stumbled forward and
grabbed the rope. Its other end was knotted to another stay rope that
led off through the snow.

"I've got it!" the prince shouted. He trudged through the snow,
holding onto the rope like a sailor holding a guide rope in a heavy
storm.

One moment Prince Thokmay was calf-deep in snow. The next, he was
standing on the road with the rope in his hands. He blinked, then
whirled around.  The tied-together ropes stretched no more than ten
yards to the saddle bag, which sat dumbly on the dry, stony
ground. The wood the prince had collected was tumbled together a few
yards from the bag.

"But I---but it was snowing!" the prince mumbled.

"I know," the sergeant said. "You're covered in it. And your hands!
Your Highness, you're freezing! I'll get the fire---"

"N-N-No!" the prince chattered. "Th-that's what st-st-started it, I
think. The l-l-land was ang-ang-angry about th-the f-fire."

"Well, it didn't react here, Your Highness," the sergeant said firmly.
"And we have to get you warmed up. Sit down here."

It only took Sergeant Gyalpa a few heartbeats to coax a small spark to
life in a pile of tinder, and another few moments to get it to catch
on a small branch. The prince watched miserably as the fire slowly
spread through wood, which was still smoldering from the fire the
sergeant had doused. Feeling slowly returned to his fingers and toes,
and what they mostly felt was painful.

He sniffled and wiped his nose. "I couldn't see anything," he said. "I
mean, out there."

"I couldn't either, Your Highness" the sergeant said. "You were just
stumbling around, it looked like." He frowned. "I wonder...  Sergeant
Dambu said once that there were safe roads in the Blight. The Pilots
built them so that they could cart stuff in to Fast Lake to dump
it. Maybe this is what's left of one of those."

"S-so are we headed in toward the lake, or out?" the prince asked. His
voice cracked again.

The sergeant shook his head. "I don't know, Your Highness. Direction
doesn't mean a lot in here." He looked up at the starless sky. "I just
wonder what's going to be waiting for us when we get out. Muddh must
know he can't hold Apple Bridge for long, not even with a dozen
tornadoes. He must be planning something, but what?"

## The Other Side of the Mirror

Noxy took the stairs two at a time, but slowed to a walk as she got
closer to Sergeant Dambu's door. She knocked hesitantly, then pushed
the door open.

The room she stepped into was as large as her own, but seemed smaller.
Half a dozen old pieces of furniture had been pushed against one wall
and covered with sheets. A narrow cot lay under the window, next to a
plain wooden desk and stool. The only decorations were a framed sketch
of a run-down old farmhouse, and an oval mirror taller than Noxy
hanging on the wall opposite the bed. A gentle breeze blew in past the
open shutters on the room's single large window.

"Sergeant Dambu?" Noxy asked the empty air, even though she could see
no-one was present.

"Noxy?" The cloudherd jumped and whirled around at the sound of a
voice behind her.

"Oh, I'm sorry, dear," Dolly said, patting her arm distractedly. "I
didn't mean to startle you." The old orangutan looked around the room
curiously, just as Noxy had done a few moments before.

"It's all right," Noxy replied a bit shakily. "Have you seen Sergeant
Dambu?"

"No, I haven't. The soldiers downstairs said you'd come up to look for
her."

"I wonder where she's gone?" Noxy asked, puzzled. "She must have been
completely exhausted by that spell she cast. But guess what Mope and I
found out?" she added excitedly, suddenly remembering why she had come
upstairs. "That bear, Rust---she bought blankets and biscuits and
other stuff in the market a couple of days ago, and got a raft from
some raccoons. Mope thinks it must have been to take Princess Ogmin
down the river!"

"Downriver?" Dolly gasped. "But---but then she could be anywhere by
now!"

Noxy felt awful as she saw tears well up in Dolly's eyes. She closed
her eyes and mind-listened for a moment, then grabbed Dolly's
shoulders in her hands. "Listen," she said urgently. "We can take
Charger. She's still not well, but if the tornado really is gone, and if
we go slowly, it ought to be all right. Clouds heal pretty quickly,
you know, especially young ones. Even if Rust has the fastest raft on
the river, we ought to be able to catch up in an hour or two."

Dolly stood absolutely still for a moment. When she spoke, the tone of
her voice reminded Noxy of Sergeant Gyalpa. "All right," she said.
"I'll get some clothes for her, and some proper food."

"I'll wait here and tell Sergeant Dambu," Noxy nodded. The orangutan
hurried away.

Noxy took a deep breath. Charger was feeling stronger---Noxy hadn't lied
about that---and she really was a quick healer, but the injured cloud
wouldn't be back to her full strength for at least another day. She
could imagine what Grappa Diego or Aft would say if they ever found
out...

She was still worrying about it when the oval mirror next to Sergeant
Dambu's cot went *bloop* and began to ripple, like a pond that someone
had just thrown a pebble into. For one wild second Noxy was sure that
she was dreaming, that the whole day must have been just a dream.
Without thinking she took a step forward. "Ouch!" she whimpered as she
banged her shin against one of the old dressers standing next to the
wall. She lost her balance stumbled down onto one knee.

Just as she did so, the mirror went *bloop* again. Muddh toppled out
into the room and collapsed in a heap on the floor, a small leather
backpack clutched in one hand.

Noxy's body reacted before her mind had a chance to get in the way.
She ducked under the sheet that was draped over the dresser she had
just banged her shin against and flattened herself on the dusty wooden
floor.

She lay there, afraid to move, afraid even to breathe, until she heard
the skinny smuggler groan and get to his feet. "Dambu?" he whispered
loudly. "Dambu, girl, where are you? Eh?"

Noxy saw the smuggler's feet under the edge of the sheet as he tiptoed
past the her to the door. The door's hinges creaked slightly as he
pulled it closed. As he walked back toward the mirror, Noxy noticed
that his boots didn't match. One was dirty brown, and worn down at the
heel, while the other had a delicate pattern of copper buttons
stitched around the sole, and looked like it had just been
polished. *I can guess where you came from,* she thought.

Sergeant Dambu's cot creaked as the smuggler sat down on it. Noxy's
mind raced. Dolly would be back any moment. If she found Muddh, the
smuggler would have to---

The door creaked open. "Ah, finally!" Muddh said. Noxy heard him get
to his feet. "I was just wondering if I should go down to the kitchen
and see about some dinner."

"They'd feed you your own ears if you did," Sergeant Dambu said. Noxy
could hear the weariness in her voice. "Do you have any idea what that
monster of yours has done to this town?"

"Oh, they needed an excuse for a good clean-up anyway, didn't they?"
Noxy saw Muddh's mismatched boots again. He stopped a few feet in
front of Sergeant Dambu. "I'm more worried about what it did to
*you*," he said, doing his best to sound concerned.

"Nothing good," the sergeant replied shortly. She made to step past
the smuggler, but he stepped into her way. Their boots were almost
toe-to-toe.

"Let me look at you..." he said softly. There was a pause, and then
Noxy heard him say, "Oh, Dambu. Dambu, girl---you shouldn't have done
this. Not this. Not for them."

"You didn't leave me much choice," the sergeant replied. "There would
have been nothing left of this town but mud by the time it was done."

"But girl, there's not even going to be mud left by the time we're
done.  You know that!" Muddh sounded amused.

Sergeant Dambu was silent. "And I'm afraid that's the bad news I'm
here to give you," the smuggler continued. "I'm not going to be able
to finish this on my own. I'm going to need your help."

Sergeant Dambu snorted. "Mine? Look at me, Muddh---look at me. Here,
would you like one as a souvenir?"

"Shh, shh," Muddh said soothingly, even as he stepped back. "Don't do
that. Don't pull at them. Just leave them alone. We'll be done soon,
done for good, and then you can just magic yourself up a whole new set
of teeth." He stepped forward again. Noxy heard a rustling sound as he
hugged the sergeant.

*If the door wasn't closed, I could get past them now,* Noxy thought.
*Oh, Dolly, be careful...*

"What happened, anyway?" Sergeant Dambu asked.

"Turns out the Blight didn't like us much," Muddh replied. "And after
all we're going to do for it---shows you what kind of gratitude you
can expect from dirt and rocks, eh?" He sighed. "The bad news is that
Old Musclebrain managed to knock the spirit trap out of my hands. I'm
sorry, girl, but it's gone---the land swallowed it up." He made a
gulping noise to illustrate. "We're going to have to do this the hard
way."

There was a moment of silence. "What do you mean?" Sergeant Dambu
asked hollowly, as if she already knew the answer, but still had some
hope that she was wrong.

"I mean you're going to have to break the spells on the dam yourself,"
Muddh said. "No, listen, listen to me," he added urgently, answering
some look that Noxy couldn't see. "Just listen. You can do it, I know
you can. It doesn't matter how much it takes out of you, not this
time. Once we can get to the lake and back out again without turning
into dust, you'll have all the magic you've ever wanted, all the magic
you've ever dreamed of. It'll be just those stories Dad used to
tell. You'll have the power of the stars, the wind, the, the, I don't
know, the whole *ocean*! But you have to break that dam. Dambu, you
have to. We're so close."

"I can't," the magician told him faintly. "Not now. There are five
different spells that have to be cast. The guards would stop me before
I was halfway through the first one."

"Well, if that braying little donkey of a prince had taken the whole
troop with him, that wouldn't be a problem," Muddh snarled. "Can you
order them away? Can you, I don't know, can you send them to look for
what's-her-name, the girl?"

"I could..." Sergeant Dambu said slowly. "Or I could have them help
clear up the mess your tornado made. If I gave them their orders in
ones and twos, they wouldn't realize the dam's been left unguarded."
Noxy saw the sergeant's feet walk over to the cot, and heard it creak
as she sat down. "I'm just so tired..."

Noxy held her breath, then sloowwwwly slid forward so that she could
peek under the sheet and see what was happening in the room. Muddh
was fishing around in his pack. Sergeant Dambu was looking at her
reflection in the mirror he had come through. Finally Muddh said,
"Aha!"  He pulled a small black cloth bag out of his pack, loosened
the drawstring, and pulled out a clear glass marble.

He frowned at it. "Almost empty, almost," he muttered. He sniffed at
it, then held it out to Sergeant Dambu. "Do you think there's enough
left for another trip?" he asked.

"I don't know," the sergeant said dully.

"Hmph." Muddh up-ended the bag and shook it out onto the desk. He
picked up one of the pebbles that rattled onto the desk, sniffed at
it, then licked it as if it were a piece of candy. "Nope," he said. He
picked up another. "Definitely not. Ah, here we are." He showed
Sergeant Dambu the pebble he had selected. "The back wall of the old
farmhouse. Remember how we used to hide there when it was time to do
chores?"

"Did we?" Sergeant Dambu said, sounding for a moment like the little
girl she had once been, back before the Blight took her home away from
her. "I wish---I wish I could remember."

"I'll do the remembering for both of us," Muddh promised. "For as
long as I have to. But that won't be much longer, will it?"

Sergeant Dambu blinked and heaved a deep sigh. "What are you doing?"
she asked, as if waking from a deep sleep.

"We can't take any chances, not now," the skinny smuggler said. He
showed her the marble and the pebble he had selected. "I told them
all, if we got separated, they should make for the farmhouse. The
land's pretty quiet around there, and slower than most of the Blight."
He snorted a laugh. "Dad did that much right at least."

He closed his hand into a fist. "Tell your troops you've found out by
magic that we're riding on Apple Bridge. Tell them, I don't know, tell
them you had a vision when you were fighting the tornado, but you only
just remembered it. Whatever you say, make sure you send them along
the south road. The *south* road, all right? We'll wait for them where
the road comes around what used to be Aunt Angela's place."

Sergeant Dambu sighed again. "Do we have to?" she asked.

"No," the smuggler said uncaringly, "But it's the safest card to
play."  He leaned over and kissed her cheek. "I'll see you when it's
over," he said. "And I promise, it'll be over soon."

He straightened up, shouldered his pack, and tossed the marble and
pebble underhanded into the mirror. Instead of bouncing off, they made
a slight *gloop*. Once again ripples spread across the mirror. Muddh
stepped into them and disappeared.

Sergeant Dambu waited a few seconds, then stood up, crossed over to
the desk, picked up her sword, and drew it. "You can come out now,
Noxy," she said quietly.

Noxy held her breath, but didn't move. Sergeant Dambu waited a second,
then flipped the sheet up with her sword. "I saw you in the mirror,"
she said tiredly. "Now come out. And please, don't try to yell." The
sergeant hefted the sword. "It's been a while since I had to use one
of these, but you know what they say---once you learn, you never
forget."

Noxy edged out from underneath the dresser. As she did so, Sergeant
Dambu stepped sideways to stay between Noxy and the door.

They studied each other for a few heartbeats while Noxy dusted herself
off. Sergeant Dambu spoke first. "Aren't you going to ask me why?"

"I really don't care," Noxy said bitterly. "All I care about is that
you're going to hurt a lot of people. A *lot* of people. And my cloud,
too."

Sergeant Dambu smiled faintly. "And all I care about is what's under
Fast Lake. Muddh's shown me things, things I never knew were
possible. He found a spirit trap, just a hoop of copper with some
wires on it. Do you know what it did? It let the person a spell was
*for* pay for it, instead of the person casting it. Just think what
that would mean! Just think what it would be like to be able to do
magic without---without---" She put her hand to her mouth and
tugged. "Without this!"

Noxy looked away from the tooth that Sergeant Dambu was holding out.
"And that's worth killing everyone in Apple Bridge?" she asked.

"That's worth anything," Sergeant Dambu said, without hesitation,
without a trace of doubt in her voice. "Justice is worth whatever it
costs."

"Justice?" Noxy gasped in outrage. "Where's the justice in killing
innocent people!?"

"Where's the justice in magicians having to scrape themselves down to
the bone, year after year, for other people's sake?" Sergeant Dambu
snapped back. "And where's the justice in spending your whole life
just trying to keep a lid on some garbage that some magician who was
dead two hundred years before I was born couldn't be bothered to clean
up for himself?" She gestured with the sword at the cot. "Now *sit
down!* I have work to do, and I can't have you running around getting
in the way."

Noxy crossed her arms. "What are you going to do? Put me to sleep for
a hundred years?"

"No," Sergeant Dambu said, tired again. "I'm going to tie you up. I
can't afford to waste any magic putting a spell on you right now."

Noxy edged over to the cot and sat down. Without looking away from
her, the sergeant reached down to open her kit bag, then pulled out a
coil of heavy twine. "Put out your hands," she ordered Noxy. "On
second thought, stand up, so that I can---"

The door burst open with a bang. Sergeant Dambu whirled around,
raising her sword, but Dolly ducked under it. Before Noxy could fill
her lungs to scream, Dolly grabbed her by the waist, slung her over a
shoulder, and leaped through the open window.

"Hang on!" Dolly yelled. Noxy caught just a glimpse of the ground
beneath her, far beneath her, then went *oomph!* as Dolly caught a
branch of one of the apple trees that grew next to the garrison house
and swung them around. Something sizzled behind them as Dolly grabbed
another branch, then half-slithered, half-slid down the tree onto a
shingled roof.

"Stop! Stop!" Noxy shouted. "We're---ooph!---we're far enough away!"

Dolly slowed, then put Noxy down and collapsed in a heap. "I'm too old
to be doing things like that," she wheezed. "As a matter of fact, now
that I think about it, I don't think I was ever young enough."

"Did you hear them? Did you?" Noxy demanded.

Dolly nodded. Noxy could hear the old orangutan's breath rasping in
and out. "Just...just the last bit. About...about sending the soldiers
away."

"We have to stop them!" Noxy said. "They'll---"

"How?" Dolly gasped.

Noxy opened her mouth to say, "We'll tell the soldiers," then closed
it again. Dolly was right. It would be their word against Sergeant
Dambu's.

"What---spell---" Dolly tried to say.

"It's all right, don't talk," Noxy said to her, suddenly concerned.
The old orangutan's eyes were wide, and Noxy could see her chest
heaving. She reached out impulsively and put her arms around her
rescuer. "Thank you," she said softly, hugging Dolly.

Dolly just nodded. Gradually her heartbeat began to slow down. "What
if she casts a spell on us?" she finally managed to say. "With a
hairbrush, or---"

"She doesn't have the strength," Noxy said, trying to sound more
certain than she felt. "She needs it all for the dam. But we have to
do something to stop her. We have to save the town!"

Prince Thokmay and Sergeant Gyalpa took turns sleeping through what
passed for night in the Blight. They didn't re-light the fire. It was
so cold by the time morning came that the prince shivered through the
whole of his last watch.

"It's cold, isn't it, Your Highness?" Sergeant Gyalpa finally said
without opening his eyes.

"I've been colder," the prince chattered, "Up in the mountains. But
not by much."

This time Sergeant Gyalpa did open his eyes, and sit up. He rubbed his
knee for a moment, then settled back on his elbows. "What was it like,
Your Highness?" he asked. "If you don't mind my asking."

"I didn't feel any different afterward, if that's what you mean,"
Prince Thokmay said. "It's probably easiest to show you." People had
asked him that question a hundred different ways in the four years
since his return from Stale. His answers had always seemed
inadequate. The magician Barramarrabee had finally taken pity on him,
and given him something to help explain.

He fished around in his pocket for a moment and pulled out a loop of
string. "I think this is the right one," he said, handing it to the
sergeant.

Sergeant Gyalpa looked at suspiciously. "What is it?"

"It's a knot that can't be untied," the prince told him. "The wizard
Sebastian made it, a long time ago. One of the magicians at court gave
it to me."

The sergeant examined the knot. "Doesn't look hard," he hedged. "Just
a half-snake under."

"Go ahead, try it," the prince urged.

Sergeant Gyalpa raised his eyebrows, then took off his gloves and
started to untie the knot. At least, that's what he set out to do.
Somehow, though, he dropped the string as he was taking off his left
glove. He had to hunt around a second to find it. When he picked it
up, it caught on a button on one of the side pockets of his
trousers. When he tried to tug it free, it slipped through his
fingers. He cursed under his breath and picked it up again more
carefully.

A couple of minutes later, he had finally managed to get a firm grip
on the string using both hands, only to find that he didn't have any
fingers left to untie it. "It really doesn't like me, does it?" he
said in exasperation, and then added, "Your Highness."

"No, it doesn't," the prince agreed. "And if you hung it from a nail,
and tried to work on it that way, you'd stumble and bang your head.
That's how I got this." He pointed at a small scar on his forehead.
"It's not that the knot is difficult, it just...can't be untied." He
looked straight at the sergeant, holding the man's eyes for a moment
as Mope had taught him. "That's what it was like. Nothing changed,
except that I could never be king."

Neither spoke for a few moments. The emptiness of the twisted land
around them seemed to fill every space, every silence. "What was it
like for you?" the prince finally asked. "I mean, growing old so
quickly."

The sergeant cleared his throat. "Doesn't feel special," he said after
a moment's reflection. "I guess anyone who's a soldier gets old too
fast, whether they're in the Blight or not."

They traveled as before. Sergeant Gyalpa rode on Bucket, while Prince
Thokmay walked along beside them. They saw mud and rocks, bushes and
trees, but nothing that moved except an occasional bird, far in the
distance.  Prince Thokmay tried to count his footsteps to keep track of
how far they had come, but kept forgetting whether he was in the three
hundreds or five hundreds. He supposed it didn't really matter in the
Blight anyway.

He was startled out of his bleak daydream by Sergeant Gyalpa's voice.
"Look, Your Highness," the sergeant said, pointing. It took Prince
Thokmay a moment to realize that all the sergeant was pointing at was a
few brown blades of grass, and a lone dandelion.

"Is it dangerous?" the prince asked.

Sergeant Gyalpa laughed. "No, Your Highness. It's just a plain old
dandelion. They don't grow in the deep Blight. They don't like the
magic." The sergeant scanned the hills around them. "We must be coming
out of it, but I don't recognize where we are."

They saw the next dandelion ninety-two paces later. There was another
thirty-six paces after that, and another after that. Slowly,
grudgingly, the rocky brown earth let normal life take hold. The
prince couldn't help but grin the first time he saw a startled rabbit
streak away from them.

The sergeant noticed his grin. "It's always good coming out of there,
Your Highness." He tipped his head back slightly and sniffed. "And is
that water I smell?"

Bucket sped up as they crested a small rise. The road ran down on the
other side to the roofless ruins of a one-room mill on the banks of
the slow-moving Trout. A stand of apple trees had gone wild near what
was left of the mill's walls. A few brown logs poking up out of the
river like rotten teeth showed where the mill's loading dock had been.

Sergeant Gyalpa let Bucket follow her head down the hill and into the
trees. As she bit an apple off a low-hanging branch, he clambered out
of the saddle and put his arm around Prince Thokmay's shoulder. "It'll
be safe to light a fire here, Your Highness," he said, wincing as they
shuffled over to what was left of the mill building. "Then we can
figure out how we're going to get back to town."

They were just a few feet away from the building when Prince Thokmay
heard Bucket snort, then neigh loudly. "Back me!" Sergeant Gyalpa said
loudly, taking his arm from the prince's shoulders, drawing his sword,
and turning to his right, all at the same time.

Prince Thokmay drew his own sword and turned to his left, so that he
and the sergeant were facing in opposite directions. "What's
happening?" he whispered loudly.

"Something's up there," the sergeant said shortly. He stood
motionless, searching the mill, the river bank, and the knee-high
summer grass with his eyes. "Can you see anything in the trees?"

The prince swallowed. "No," he said, trying to match the sergeant's
calm tone. "Nothing except Bucket."

"Stay with me," the sergeant ordered the prince. He half-hopped,
half-limped forward. Prince Thokmay stepped backward to stay with him,
keeping his sword in front of him and holding his left arm straight
out from his side for balance.

"RRAAAAWWWWRRR!!" Rust charged at them from around the corner of the
old mill. The prince whirled around as Sergeant Gyalpa cursed, hopping
to keep his balance. She batted Sergeant Gyalpa's sword out of his
hand, then reared up on her hind legs as the sergeant toppled
backward, cursing.

"Throw it on the ground!" she snarled to the prince. "Now!"

"Keep back!" he shouted at her. He lunged at her belly. Too late, he
realized that she had tricked him. She stepped nimbly aside and batted
his head with her paw. The blow knocked him flat.

He lay there for a moment in a daze with the world swimming around
him.  It steadied and came back into focus. His head started to pound
at the same moment.

"Your Highness, are you all right?" The sergeant rolled over and
dragged himself over to Prince Thokmay.

"He's all right," the bear rumbled. She had dropped back onto all
fours.  She sniffed at them, then lumbered over to the prince's sword
and carefully picked it up in her jaws. She set it down against a
stone and stepped on it. The sword bent slightly, then snapped with a
sharp *crack!* A moment later, the sergeant's sword made the same
sound.

Sergeant Gyalpa helped the prince sit up. "What are you doing here?"
he mumbled.

"I was about to ask you the same question," the bear said. She glanced
over at the stand of apple trees, from which Bucket was nervously
watching them. Rust bunched her shoulders and charged at the horse
with another huge roar. The horse turned and galloped away.

"Stupid animals," Rust muttered under her breath, watching the horse
disappear over the top of the hill. "None of 'em have ever been
gifted, did you know that?"

Prince Thokmay stood up as she approached. "Where's my sister?" he
demanded. "What have you done with her?"

"She's down by the river," Rust said, then snarled, "No!" as the
prince made to dodge around her. She nodded her head ponderously at
the sergeant. "Help him up. We all go together. And we all go
*slowly*, you hear? Slowly."

Even if the bear hadn't been two watchful steps behind him, Prince
Thokmay couldn't have gone quickly with Sergeant Gyalpa's arm around
his shoulder. The sergeant seemed much less steady than he had been
before the bear had ambushed them. Prince Thokmay hoped he was
exaggerating his lameness.

They came around the corner. A sturdy-looking river raft was
half-hidden in the brambles that had grown up against the side of the
mill, where the door to the loading dock had once been. And on the
raft---

"Ogmin!" Prince Thokmay cried. His sister was sitting in the middle of
the raft next to a crude lean-to. She had drawn up her knees and
buried her face in them. She still had her nightdress on, and a
too-large coat and a ragged pair of boots that looked like some poor
beggar's cast-offs.  Nothing was left of her long, beautiful hair
except stubble.

At the sound of her brother's voice her head shot up. "Thokmay!" she
cried.  "Oh, Thokmay!"

Without thinking Prince Thokmay shook off Sergeant Gyalpa's arm and
started to run. He only got a few paces before Rust butted him in the
back with her head and sent him sprawling.

He heard Ogmin scream as he rolled onto his back and looked straight
into Rust's angry eyes. She stood over him with one paw on either side
of his head. Her breath was hot and wet and foul on his face. "I said
*slowly*," she said menacingly. "I won't say it again."

Prince Thokmay gulped. The bear's jagged teeth were yellowish near
their roots, but gleaming white at the points. "I'm sorry," he said
weakly.

"Rrrmmm," the bear rumbled. She shuffled sideways so that he could get
up. "Now get up. It's time for dinner."

Somehow Prince Thokmay helped Sergeant Gyalpa slosh through the
knee-deep water to the raft. The prince scrambled up onto the raft and
embraced his sister. "Oh, Ogmin," he said, hugging her fiercely. "Are
you all right?"

"I'm sc-scared," his sister said, tears running down her cheeks as she
held him tight. "I tried not to be, but I couldn't help it."

"Sh, sh, sh," he whispered in her ear. "It's all right. It's all
right.  I'm not going to let anything happen to you." He took a
half-step back to look at her.

Ogmin dropped her eyes. "They---they cut off all my hair," she
whispered desolately. "I told them Dolly would be mad, but they did it
anyway."

The prince felt tears welling up in his own eyes, but blinked them
away.  "It's all right," he said fiercely. "You just watch---the day
after we get back to Apple Bridge, everyone will have cut their hair
just as short as yours."

"But I don't want to go back there," Princess Ogmin said. "I hate it
there. I want to go *home!*"

"So do I," Prince Thokmay whispered. He gave her another hug. "So do
I. But we can't, not just yet."

Sergeant Gyalpa cleared his throat. "Your Highness...?"

"Yes?" Prince Thokmay said, without letting go of his sister or turning
around.

The raft suddenly dipped to one side as Rust scrambled up onto it.
Princess Ogmin shrieked. Prince Thokmay stumbled, then straightened up.

"You," Rust said to Sergeant Gyalpa. "Get off."

"No," the sergeant replied flatly. "I'm staying with Their
Highnesses."

The bear snorted. "You can get off and wait for your horse to come
back, or I can knock you off. It comes to the same thing either way."

Sergeant Gyalpa's face reddened. "I will *not* leave!" he shouted.

"Do as she says, Sergeant," Prince Thokmay ordered tiredly as the bear
growled deep in her throat. "She's right---if she doesn't want you on
board, one way or another you're going to get off. That's an order,"
he added, as the sergeant took an angry breath. "When Bucket comes
back, I want you to ride for Apple Bridge and get help."

"Yes, Your Highness," the sergeant said stiffly. He hesitated, then
saluted. "It's been a pleasure to serve you, sir." For a moment he
looked as though he wanted to say something else as well, but the
moment passed. He slid awkwardly off the raft into the river.

"Sergeant!" the bear called. Sergeant Gyalpa turned around.

"Push us back out into the current before you go," the bear ordered.

For a moment Prince Thokmay thought the sergeant was going to climb
back up on the raft and try to strangle Rust with his bare
hands. Instead, he looked up at the prince. "Your Highness?" he asked.

"Do it," Prince Thokmay told him. "And good luck getting home."

"Thank you, Your Highness." The sergeant braced his shoulder against
the raft and pushed with his good leg. The raft barely moved. Sergeant
Gyalpa took a deep breath and grunted as he shoved again. This time
the raft shifted slightly. A third push got it clear of the
brambles. It slowly gained speed as the river current began to pull it
along.  Sergeant Gyalpa stood there with the river lapping at his
thighs until the main current of the Trout caught the raft and took it
away. Then he struggled back to the bank and started calling for
Bucket.

Prince Thokmay resisted the urge to wave as the sergeant dwindled into
the distance behind them. Instead, he put his arm around his sister.
Princess Ogmin sniffled again and laid her head on her brother's
shoulder.

"Don't worry," Prince Thokmay whispered in her ear. "Sergeant Gyalpa
will get help. We'll be all right."

The raft swayed again as Rust sat down on her haunches next to the
lean-to in the middle. "There's food in there," she said, waving a paw
at the shaky-looking structure. "And blankets, if you're cold."

"Thank you, that's very kind," the prince said icily. "I suppose it
would be too much to ask for a change of clothes and a hot bath as
well?"

The bear's nose twitched. "I only planned on having the princess along
on this trip," she warned the prince. "If you don't mind your manners,
I might decide that was still the best idea."

The prince bit off an angry response. "Why don't we sit up at the
front?" he said to Princess Ogmin. "We can play 'I Spy' if you want."

"I don't want to play," she whined, but followed her brother up to the
front of the raft.

"How about I go first?" the prince said lightly. "I spy, with my
little eye, something that is---"

"Bears can swim, you know," Rust interrupted from behind them. "We can
swim pretty well. Even if you could make it to the shore ahead of me,
your sister probably couldn't."

The prince sat silently for a moment, then put his arm around his
sister again. "All right," he said. "If you don't want to play, we
don't have to."

"I'm hungry," Princess Ogmin said after a few minutes.

Prince Thokmay twisted around. "Can I get her some food?" he asked
Rust.

The bear shrugged. "Why not?" She wrinkled her nose again. "The
biscuits are in the brown bag, and the apple sauce---"

"---is in the jars," the prince finished for her. He knelt down in
front of the lean-to and pulled out the biscuit bag and two jars of
apple sauce. A pair of heavy blankets were crumpled together to make a
Ogmin-sized nest under the lean-to. A small straw doll lay beside
them.

Prince Thokmay picked up the doll. "What's this?" he asked.

The bear shifted uncomfortably. "I thought it would keep her quiet,"
she said.

"Hm." Someone had pulled a few strands of straw part-way out of the
head to give the doll some spiky hair. Prince Thokmay felt tears sting
his eyes again. He gently laid the doll back by the blankets.

He sat down cross-legged and laid some biscuits out on his
leg. "You're acting more like a nurse than a kidnapper," he observed
as he spooned some apple sauce onto the biscuits. "From what we saw of
your friend Muddh, I would have expected you to be...rougher."

A rumble came from deep in the bear's throat. For a moment Prince
Thokmay was reminded of the sound that Kulbinder made when he smelled
something that he didn't like. "He's not my friend," Rust said. "We
were just business partners, that's all."

"Business partners," the prince echoed neutrally, careful not to look
up. Mope had taught him this, as well---how to leave silences for
other people to fill.

The bear rumbled again. "He needed eyes and ears in Apple Bridge, and
someone to buy supplies for him with the money he got for the things
he brought out of the Blight. I needed the princess. It seemed like a
good exchange."

"You needed the princess," the prince repeated. "Why didn't you need
me?"

The bear snorted. "How would I have gotten you?" she asked. "Muddh's
magic was good enough to get the princess out in the middle of the
night, but it wouldn't have worked on an adult."

"She's an adult," the prince said angrily, then cut himself off.

He thought furiously as he spooned some more apple sauce. "Why did you
leave Sergeant Gyalpa behind?" he asked, handing Princess Ogmin a
biscuit. The princess made a face at it, but took it and bit into it
anyway. Prince Thokmay supposed that she had been eating a lot of
biscuits and apple sauce recently.

"Why would I bring him?" the bear replied. "Nobody cares enough about
him for him to be a good hostage."

"Bringing him along wasn't the only other option," the prince said,
swallowing a mouthful of biscuit himself. He looked over at the bear.

She studied her paws for a heartbeat. "No sense killing unless you
have to," she said. She raised her head to meet the prince's
eyes. "It's something humans would do well to learn," she added
bitterly.

The prince looked away first. "Probably," he said. "But I don't see
how kidnapping us is going to teach them." He handed his sister
another biscuit. She sat on the edge of the raft and scraped the apple
sauce off it with her finger, then licked the sticky goop off her
finger as the river bank went by.

"I don't expect it to," the bear said. "But it will teach animals that
they can fight back if they really want to. It will show them that
they don't have to live by laws that humans have made, or stay in the
cages that humans have put them in."

"I don't remember ever seeing a gifted animal in a cage," the prince
said. "Not in Gandan, anyway."

"Some cages aren't easy to see," the bear told him, settling back on
her haunches. "I've been trading in Apple Bridge for almost twenty
years, but I still have to ask for permission to set up my stall each
time I come to town. Human traders are allowed to come and go as they
please.  Every noble household in the Marches hires gifted animals,
but how many of those animals ever become nobles themselves?"

"How many of them would want to?" Prince Thokmay asked, frightened
slightly by the anger in the bear's voice. "It's not as much fun as
most people think."

"Rrrr..." Princess Ogmin jumped at the bear's angry growl and looked
at her brother fearfully. He patted her shoulder with his hand, but
didn't take his eyes away from the bear. "That's what your kind always
say," Rust sneered. "Oh, poor us, what we do is so hard, it takes so
much out of us. The world is better off just letting us run
things. Well, do you know what's hard, Your Highness?" The bear almost
spat the last two words. "What's really hard is watching your son run
through with a spear for sport, and knowing that the *humans* who did
it went off and bragged to their friends that night at dinner about
what a good day's hunting they'd had."

"If someone murdered your son, why didn't you find a judge and have
them brought to trial?" the prince asked. "Even in Garheim, they
would---"

"Because killing ungifted animals isn't murder!" the bear
snarled. "Not according to human law. It doesn't matter if their
parents are, or if their parents love them. If an animal can't speak,
it's fair game for any featherless chicken with time on his hands and
a taste for blood."

She pointed at Princess Ogmin, who had covered her ears with her
hands.  "But it would be murder if I did to her what your kind did to
my son, wouldn't it? Why is killing an ungifted animal not a crime,
but killing an ungifted human is?"

The prince gaped at her, his mind whirling. "But you can't---she's not
ungifted!" he exclaimed. "It's not the same thing!"

"Oh no?" the bear asked grimly, settling back on her haunches. "Then
why does she have a nursemaid, instead of a tutor like you do?"

"You're mad," the prince said flatly.

The bear snorted. "I live in a mad world. But I think a lot of other
animals will start to see it a little more clearly once I show them
how to look at it."

The prince's mouth had gone dry. "I don't believe you," he said
steadily. "If you were really going to murder my sister, you would
have done it by now."

"Rrrr..." Rust scratched her neck. "Shut up and eat your apple
sauce. I'm tired of talking to humans."

The prince studied her face carefully. "That's what you meant to do,
isn't it?" he said slowly. "But you couldn't. You couldn't give her a
doll to sleep with, then... then..."

"I said shut up!" the bear growled. The prince shook his head, then
turned around and put his arm back around his sister.

## A Trap Is Sprung

Noxy's feet dangled in the air. "Is it all right, dear?" Dolly asked.

"Yes," Noxy said breathlessly. "You can let go."

The orangutan released her arm. She dropped into the alley with an
*oomph!* Dolly landed down beside her a moment later.

"Are you hurt?" she asked in a concerned voice.

"Just... winded..." Noxy gasped. She gave herself another moment, then
stood up and brushed the dirt from her knees. "Come on."

They crept as quietly as they could through the narrow alley toward
the rear courtyard. Shouts came, and they froze, but it was just a
couple of soldiers who needed help moving an uprooted tree.

Noxy almost jumped out of her skin at the sound of three sharp whistle
blasts. The sound was so loud that she and Dolly both clapped their
hands over their ears. Noxy looked around wildly, sure that the
whistle blower had to have been right behind them, but no-one was
there.

"What was that?" Dolly asked fearfully.

"I don't know," Noxy said. "But we're almost there." She closed her
eyes and mind-spoke to Charger, calming the nervous cloud.

They had only gone another few steps when they heard shouts and
commotion behind them. Noxy hesitated, then put her finger to her lips
to signal 'quiet' and crept back the way they had come. By the time
she reached the other end of the alley, two squads of soldiers were
already lined up in the main courtyard. More came running into their
places as she watched.

Sergeant Dambu stood in front of them with her head and shoulders
bowed.  She was leaning on a walking stick, and seemed oblivious to
the noise around her. *She must have used magic to make her whistle
louder,* Noxy thought.

"Oh no!" Dolly whispered, peeking around Noxy's waist. "She's going to
send them out to be ambushed, like she said!"

"We have to stop her!" Noxy said.

"Wait, no!" Dolly hissed, grabbing Noxy just as the cloudherd started
to step out of the alley. She pulled Noxy back a few paces and spun
her around. "Who do you think they'll believe, us or her?"

"But we have to try!" Noxy pleaded. "The smugglers will kill them!"

"They'll believe their sergeant before they'll believe an orangutan
and a foreign girl," Dolly said resignedly.

When Sergeant Dambu spoke, her voice was too weak to carry to the
alley.  All Noxy and Dolly heard were a few disjointed words:
"...hill... call... help...  wounded... quickly..." Then the soldiers
saluted and ran for the stables, leaving the sergeant standing alone
in the middle of the courtyard.

"Come on!" Noxy hissed. Once again Dolly had to grab her and hold her
back.

"What do you think you're doing?" the orangutan asked. "She's still
strong enough to make the whistle that we heard. Do you think she
won't have enough strength to put you to sleep, or make you mute?"

"But we have to do something!" Noxy protested. Out on the square,
Sergeant Dambu looked up tiredly. Dolly and Noxy froze as the magician
glanced around, then shook her head and started walking toward the
gateway.

"Mope will know what to do," Noxy said suddenly. "He went down to the
warehouses to help rescue someone."

They waited until Sergeant Dambu had left the courtyard, then waited a
few heartbeats longer. "Ready?" Noxy whispered. Dolly nodded. "All
right, let's go." They ran across the courtyard to the archway and out
into the street.

It only took them a couple of minutes to get down to the chaos by the
docks. One old warehouse had collapsed completely, while the top part
of the wall of another had fallen in one piece into the street. It lay
there like a jigsaw puzzle that someone had been too bored to finish
assembling. The townspeople were working like busy ants to clear away
the rubble and find anyone who might be trapped underneath.

"Mope! Mope!" Noxy yelled, trying to make herself heard above the
noise and confusion.

"The ape's inside!" a familiar voice shouted back at her. The baker
was standing there with an armload of rubble in his arms, and so much
dust and mud on his face that Noxy wouldn't have recognized him if it
weren't for his deep voice.

"Are you all right?" she asked.

"I'm fine," he said, "But Jokhang---that thing swatted him like a
fly."

Noxy opened her mouth, but all she could think of saying was, "I'm
sorry." She turned and climbed up the ruins of the collapsed wall
behind Dolly.

Dolly helped to pull her up to what was left of the warehouse's upper
floor. "Mope?" they shouted. "Mope, where are you?"

"Mother?" a muffled voice shouted back. "Noxy? Is that you?" They
stepped forward cautiously. The middle of the floor had fallen in
completely when the roof had collapsed onto it. Down in the pit below
they saw Mope and two humans looking up at them anxiously. One of the
humans was the leek seller who had refused to serve Dolly. Noxy gasped
as she suddenly realized that the bundle of rags the trio was gathered
around was a man, whose leg was trapped underneath a fallen roof
timber.

"Mother, we need help down here!" Mope said urgently. "We can't lift
this on our own!"

Dolly didn't hesitate. In one fluid motion she crouched down, grabbed
a protruding floor beam, swung down beneath it, and dropped down to
the floor below. "Where do you want me?" she asked her son, brushing
her hands against her jacket.

Mope pointed at the other side of the fallen roof timber. "Over
there," he ordered. "And you two, grab the end and try to lift it from
there.  Ready? One... two... three!"

The man whose leg was caught screamed as the roof timber
shifted. "Back up!" Mope grunted at him. The man dragged himself
backward a pace. His four rescuers let the roof timber crash to the
ground and rushed to him.

"Lift his leg," Mope ordered the leek seller, pulling off his
shirt. The man screamed again. Mope twisted his shirt to make a short,
thick rope, then tied it around the man's leg. He picked up a short
runner of wood that had probably been meant for training vines and
stuck it through the makeshift tourniquet. With a grunt, he twisted it
around twice.

"That ought to stop the bleeding," he said. "But we have to get him to
a doctor."

"Mope---we need to talk to you," his mother said urgently. "It's about
the sergeant. She---" Dolly cut herself off as the leek seller and the
other man lifted the wounded man to carry him out.

The younger orangutan sat back on his haunches. "What has she done
now?"  he asked wearily. "Are we all under curfew?"

"No, worse." His mother dropped her voice. "Noxy and I heard her
talking to that trader, the one who took Princess Ogmin. They're
working together! Mope, they want to destroy the dam! She's sent all
of the soldiers out of town to be ambushed, and she's going to break
the spells on the dam!"

Mope stared at his mother. "I can't believe it," he finally said. "As
much as I dislike her, I can't believe that she'd---"

"Believe it," Noxy said. She had followed Dolly's route to the floor,
but less gracefully, and was now limping slightly. "He came through
the mirror. I think he's her brother."

"Her brother? But he's old enough to be---oh." Mope fell silent for a
moment as he worked it out. "Why would they want to destroy the dam?"

"I think they want to drain some of the magic out of Fast Lake so that
Muddh can get to it," Noxy explained. "There's magic there that works
in reverse, kind of. It takes strength from the people it works on,
instead of from the magician casting the spell."

Noxy wouldn't have thought that an orangutan's face could go pale the
way that Mope's did. "So it *does* exist..." he whispered.  "There are
stories---old stories, nightmares. That's what finally brought the sky
down on the Pilots. Someone invented a kind of magic that took from
the people it worked on, whether they wanted it or not.  But it always
took more than the magic was worth. They used it on themselves until
they'd used each other up."

"Well, Muddh has one, whatever it is," Noxy said. "And now Sergeant
Dambu's sent the soldiers out of town. Mope, she's could be at the dam
right now! She might already have started!"

"I wondered what that whistle was about," Mope muttered. He looked up
at Noxy. "Is your cloud strong enough to fly yet?" he asked.

Noxy nodded. Mope stood up with a grunt. "Good. You go and warn the
soldiers. Mother and I will figure out some way to stop Sergeant
Dambu."

Dolly stretched up onto her tiptoes to kiss the cloudherd on the
cheek.  "Be careful, dear."

Noxy ran as fast as she could back to the garrison house, no longer
caring if she was seen. Charger hovered restlessly a few feet off the
ground. Noxy jumped up and grabbed the side of the cloud with both
hands.

"Up!" she mind-spoke as she pulled herself up. "Up, up, up!"

Charger rose into the air, slowly at first and then faster. In a few
heartbeats Noxy was up above the rooftops. She glanced at the dam, but
couldn't see Sergeant Dambu. "Fast!" she mind-spoke at Charger. They
turned south and started flying above the road that led to the Blight.

Noxy crept forward until she was right at the cloud's edge. The
countryside below her was green and peaceful in the summer sun. She
saw some farmers leading horse-drawn carts toward Apple Bridge, but
was too high up to call to them.

"Higher!" she mind-ordered the cloud. Charger struggled to
obey. "Higher!  Slow!" The cloud slowed to a gentle float, and rose
higher.

Noxy scanned the landscape. The road made a long, gentle loop around a
hill up ahead. If she went around the hill the other way, over the
forest, she could save a few minutes. "Left!" she mind-spoke to Charger.
The cloud began to gather speed.

Something glinted in the trees. Noxy lay flat on Charger and took a deep
breath. Grabbing the cloud firmly with both hands, she pushed her head
over the cloud's edge. "Stop! Stop!" she ordered. She waited. The
glint came again.

"Down, slowly," she mind-spoke. For a moment she almost convinced
herself that the tiny flashes of light had come from a small stream or
pool, but then she saw movement. A moment later she could make out
people and horses. It was the smugglers.

One of them looked up as the cloud's shadow fell across his face. Noxy
had just enough time to recognize Muddh before the skinny man
shouted. The smuggler next to him twisted around in his saddle and
aimed his bow at Charger. Noxy jerked her head back. The arrow went
*sfffft!* through the air.

"Go! Go!" she mind-shouted at the cloud. Another arrow shot past the
edge of the cloud, and then Noxy shrieked as one tore through the
cloud only a few feet away from her.

They flew back along the road, around the hill. There were the
soldiers!  "Look out!" Noxy shouted. They looked up. "Ambush! In the
trees!"

It was as if she had kicked a beehive. Suddenly the soldiers had their
swords in their hands, and were galloping forward. Noxy turned Charger
in a wide arc and flew back over the battle. This time the smugglers
ignored her. A few arrows flew, but the first squad of soldiers came
crashing through the trees too quickly for the smugglers to get off a
second shot.

Outnumbered, and without the advantage of surprise, the smugglers
turned and tried to flee through the dense undergrowth. They didn't
make it very far. A few tried to fight as the soldiers caught up with
them, but most dropped their swords or bows and raised their hands.

"Yahoo!" Noxy shouted. "That's the---no, wait, over there! Over there!
He's getting away!" She pointed frantically at the road, trying to get
Charger to go lower so that she could tell the soldiers that Muddh was
escaping. The smuggler had abandoned his horse, and was running down
the road toward the Blight. Every second step carried him twenty yards
or more. Noxy urged Charger on, but Muddh and his one magic boot soon
outdistanced the cloud.

Noxy finally gave up, and turned the cloud back to where the soldiers
were collecting the defeated smugglers. She let Charger float down
gently until they were just a few feet above the trees.

"Are you all right?" shouted a soldier.

"I was about to ask you the same thing," she shouted back.

The soldier grinned. "Any day you win a fight like this is a good
one," he said. His grin vanished. "But we have to keep moving. The
prince needs us."

"No, wait! That's not true! It was a trick!" Noxy saw the doubt on the
soldier's face, and on the other faces that had turned up to look at
her. She took a deep breath. "Sergeant Dambu is working with the
smugglers. I don't know where Prince Thokmay is, but you have to get
back to Apple Bridge right away. She's going to try to break the
spells on the dam!"

"What!?" the soldier exclaimed. "But---"

"Please, you have to believe me!" Noxy said urgently. "They're going
to destroy the whole town!"

She saw the doubt on the soldier's face. Her heart sank as he said, "I
don't believe it. Not the sergeant. You can't be right."

"Please!" Noxy pleaded. "How do you think they knew to wait for you
here? Just send some of your troops back to the dam. You'll see!"

Before the soldier could reply, Noxy mind-ordered Charger back into the
sky and headed for Apple Bridge.

Meanwhile, back in town, Dolly and Mope made their way toward the dam
through the wreckage left by the tornado. They stopped only once, to
help get an overturned wagon the right side up so that it could be
moved out of the street.

They were still two blocks away from the dam when Mope pulled up
short.  "What's that?" he asked, clocking his head to one side. "That
sound..." He looked grim. "She's chanting. It's started."

They ran as fast as their awkward gait would carry them to the dam
road.  As they came around the last corner, they saw Sergeant Dambu
standing in the middle of the wooden walkway that ran along the top of
the dam. Her arms were raised, and her voice echoed around them with
unnatural clarity. The air in front of her shimmered with a faint blue
light that grew stronger even as Mope and Dolly watched.

"Stay here!" Mope told his mother. He scooped up a stone from the
road, hefted it, and threw it at the sergeant as hard as he could. He
grabbed two more while the first was still in the air and charged onto
the walkway.

His first stone hit Sergeant Dambu in the shoulder. She stumbled
forward, nearly falling off the dam into the Trout below. Mope threw
another stone on the run. Sergeant Dambu ducked, but the stone went
wide anyway.

The sergeant straightened up and made a backhanded gesture at
Mope. The rock that had hit her leaped into the air and flew at
Mope. It hit Mope in the middle of his chest with the force of a
hammer, knocking him off his feet. Sergeant Dambu gestured again, and
a thin sheet of flame raced across the dam. Mope rolled sideways with
a yelp, feeling a blast of heat as the fire singed his hair.

He scrambled onto his feet. Sergeant Dambu had drawn her sword. Mope
feinted left, then right, then lunged at her. The point of her sword
followed his every move. He had to pull up short to avoid being
spitted.

"It looks like a stand-off," he puffed. "I can't get past your blade,
but you can't look away from me to cast your spells."

"I don't have to look away," Sergeant Dambu said. "I just have to give
it a bit... more... *effort*..."

Suddenly the air started to sparkle again, brighter and brighter. Mope
heard a roaring sound. Something dark, a shadow that somehow wasn't
quite there, was piling up against the brightness in the air. A smell
like swamp mud and lightning mixed together was suddenly all around
them. The dam rumbled as the spells that held it together began to
break.

"You'll kill us both!" Mope shrieked.

"Small... price..." Sergeant Dambu gasped. Mope heard something splash
in the river below, and heard a bellow of triumph as whatever it was
broke through the spells and headed down the Trout.  The smell in the
air around him was getting stronger and stronger.

Mope feinted again, but the sergeant's swordpoint followed him like a
cobra. He took a deep breath---

---and a pale form on four legs bounded past him and leaped for the
sergeant's throat. Sergeant Dambu screamed as Edward's ghost slammed
into her, knocking her onto her knees.

"*My* town!" the ghost snarled. It leaped at her again, howling as
Sergeant Dambu's sword cut deep into its shoulder. Ghostly blood
poured out of the wound like smoke. The dog howled. It gathered itself
up for one last leap---

---and Dolly swung up onto the bridge behind Sergeant Dambu, waddled
forward two steps, and thumped her hard on the back of the head.

The sergeant dropped like a sack of potatoes. The sparkles in the air
flared like fireworks, and then were gone.

Edward's ghost stood over the fallen soldier, growling low in its
throat. It raised its nose and sniffed the air, then half-turned its
head toward Mope. "Humans," it snorted as its began to fade. "They
just don't understand..."

"Mother! Mother, are you all right?" The younger orangutan hopped
awkwardly over Sergeant Dambu and hugged his mother. They were both
crying, he realized. When had he started crying?

"Oh, Mope," Dolly sniffed. "I thought---I thought I was going to lose
you." She squeezed him tight. "Your father would have been so proud."

Mope hugged his mother back. "Thank you," he said. "He'd be proud of
you too."

## The Bear's Choice

Rust and the prince and princess floated on in silence. The only other
raft they saw was being pulled upriver by two weary donkeys. The bear
ordered Prince Thokmay and Princess Ogmin to hide in the lean-to, and
then sat in front of it and grunted a hello as it passed.

As the other raft passed, the prince and princess could hear one of
the raftsmen singing a slow, sad song. The words floated over the
river to them like wisps of cloud in a blue summer sky. "Oooh, just
one time... I would take the northwest passage..."

"Sergeant Dorbu used to sing that one," Prince Thokmay whispered in his
sister's ear. "It was so beautiful, sometimes I thought the trees were
going to tear out their roots so that they could come closer and
listen."

"Did they ever?" she whispered back.

The prince smiled and shook his head. "No, they never needed to. The
sergeant always sang loudly enough."

Rust waited until they rounded the next bend before letting the prince
and princess come out. The two humans sat down near the bow once
again.  A moment later, Princess Ogmin squeaked and grabbed her
brother as the raft suddenly lurched and began bobbing up and down.

The prince looked back to see what the bear was doing, but Rust was
looking back as well. "What's wrong?" he asked. "What's happening?"

"I don't know," the bear rumbled. She sniffed at the air. "But I can
smell something. Something *bad*."

They heard it before they saw it. A roiling two-foot crest of water,
darker than it had any right to be and somehow managing to hold itself
together, was sweeping down the width of the Trout. "Hold on!" Rust
bellowed.

The wave hit the rear of the raft like a charging rhinoceros. Prince
Thokmay nearly tumbled into the river as the raft tilted forward, then
righted itself. Princess Ogmin screamed in terror. Dark water from the
wave had splashed up over the rear of the raft onto the logs and
formed small pools. Even as they watched, the pools oozed together to
form a stream, which flowed *up* over the lip of the raft to get back
into the Trout.

"Don't let it touch you!" Rust said. "It's Blighted!"

The raft was going faster now. "Up ahead!" the prince said suddenly.
"That island! We can steer for that!" He leaped to his feet and leaned
against the steering board. The raft barely noticed.

"RRAAAAWWWWRRR!" Rust roared. She lumbered over to the steering board
and leaned her shoulder against it. Reluctantly, the raft began to
turn.

"More! More!" the prince called, trying to gauge their speed and
direction. "A little more! Hold it there! Brace yourself!"

The raft crashed through the reeds on the upstream side of the island
and ground to a halt in its muddy bank. Rust stumbled, but kept her
footing. The prince and princess were thrown right off the raft onto
the muddy little patch of land. The dark water raced past on either
side of them as they scrambled to their feet.

Suddenly the water knocked the raft sideways. Rust barely had time to
leap over onto the island before the raft went hurtling away.

The three castaways watched it go. "What's happening?" the prince
asked.  He put his arm around his sister, then hugged her, trying to
stop her shaking.

"Something must have happened to the dam in Apple Bridge," the bear
replied. She reared up on her hind legs to get a last glimpse of the
raft, then fell back on all fours. "That's the last we'll see of our
food, or your blankets."

Prince Thokmay managed a grim smile. "I guess we're all prisoners now."
The bear just snarled.

"Look!" Princess Ogmin suddenly said, pointing upstream. "Someone's
coming!"

It took the prince a moment to figure out what he was seeing. At first
he thought it was a bird, but then he realized it was a man, skipping
or hopping twenty yards at a time. Another moment, and he saw that it
was Muddh.

"What's *he* doing here?" Rust snarled.

"Oh, now, be polite," Prince Thokmay told her, feeling almost
giddy. "He *is* your business partner."

Another dozen lopsided steps brought the skinny smuggler to the little
island. "Well hello!" Muddh said jauntily. His jacket was torn and
muddied, and he had dark circles under his eyes. He held up a lock of
Princess Ogmin's hair. "Glad to see it still works."

"What do you want?" Rust growled. "We had a deal."

"Oh yes, yes, a deal," Muddh nodded vigorously. He looked
around. "You also had a raft, didn't you? Whatever happened to it?"

"What happened to the dam?" Prince Thokmay broke in. "We saw the
wave..."

"Oh, the dam, the dam," Muddh said with a wave of his hand. "The dam
is still there, I dare say. The river would be a *lot* more lively
right now if Dambu had managed to bring it down. It's a shame---we
worked a long time for this."

"Dambu?" the prince said blankly. "Sergeant Dambu?"

"Oh, yes, *Sergeant* Dambu," Muddh agreed. He sighed. "I don't
suppose she could have survived. She got that from our mother, you
know. She never learned how to give up either."

"Enough!" Rust snarled. "What do you want?"

Muddh blinked. "Why, the princess, of course," he said. He shrugged
off his shoulder pack and pulled out a loop of cord. "I imagine half
of Gandan is going to be looking for me shortly. I'll need a hostage
to see myself safely away to Chaghan." He paused. "Or maybe Barra
Bantang," he corrected himself. "I've always liked the beach."

He splatted the mud a couple of times with the toe of his lone magic
boot. "I could probably carry them both if I'd ever found the other
one of these, but as it is..." He shrugged.

"The princess is mine!" Rust growled. "We had a bargain!"

"Yes, yes, a bargain," Muddh agreed absently. "But things have
changed.  Anyway, you'll still have the prince. He'd be far too much
trouble for me to carry---far too likely to try to be a hero. Biting
off his head will do you as much good as biting off hers."

"She's *mine!*" the bear roared.

Suddenly Muddh had a knife in his hand, a knife whose blade flickered
like the tongue of a snake. "Now, dear," Muddh said kindly, "We've
worked *so* well together. Please don't spoil it now." He tossed the
loop of cord to Prince Thokmay. "Tie her up," he directed.

Much to his own surprise, the prince laughed. "No," he said flatly.

"Tch, tch," Muddh clucked, keeping his eyes on Rust. "If you don't, I
will, and I'll be *much* less gentle than you."

"Thokmay?" Princes Ogmin quavered. "What does he want?"

Prince Thokmay picked up the coil of rope and flung it back at the
smuggler. "I said no," he repeated.

Muddh shrugged. "I'm sorry," he said lightly to Rust. "It looks like
you won't be left with a hostage after all." As quick as a snake, he
twisted and lunged at the prince with the magic knife.

Prince Thokmay cried out and stepped back as the knife's blade whipped
out.  It grazed his shoulder, and instantly his whole arm went numb
with cold.  "Stand aside, boy," Muddh hissed. "Stand aside, or---"

The prince and princess never got to hear the rest of the smuggler's
threat. With a huge roar, Rust charged at Muddh. The smuggler spun
and stabbed with the magic knife again, but Rust's weight carried her
forward even as it bit into her. Muddh shrieked as they fell backward
into the dark Blight water.

"No!" he screamed. He struggled toward the shore. She roared again and
knocked him sideways with a tremendous blow. Even as she did so, the
Blight water bunched up around them, forming hundreds of dark strands
that bound them like a net and pulled them down. Muddh screamed again
as the river pulled him under. Rust roared, straining to break free.

Prince Thokmay ran forward and grabbed the coil of rope he had thrown
back at Muddh. "Take it!" he shouted, throwing one end at Rust. The
bear lunged at it and caught it in her teeth. The prince dug in his
heels and pulled as hard as he could.

He felt Princess Ogmin's arms go around his waist. Together they
leaned back, further, further, and then suddenly the rope snapped and
Rust was pulled under. The water roiled for a moment, then went still.

The prince watched dumbly as the river sucked in Rust's end of the
rope.  A few heartbeats later, the only sign that the smuggler and the
bear had ever been on the little island were their footprints.

He suddenly realized that Princess Ogmin was crying. "Sh, sh," he
said, putting his arm around her and patting her shoulder
absent-mindedly.  "It's all right. It's all right. It's over." He
looked at the dark water lapping higher and higher against the sides
of their little patch of mud.

The river rose a thumb's width at a time. A ragged shark's fin half as
tall as Prince Thokmay circled the island a few times, then headed
downstream in search of more accessible prey. Something else sparkled
across the dark Blightwater like a rainshower, and a few moments later
the prince thought he saw huge clawed footprints appear and disappear
on the river's surface.

"I want to go home," Princess Ogmin whispered.

"We will," the prince promised, wondering if there was still a home to
go to. He took a deep breath, trying to judge the distance to the
shore, and wondering how you distracted a whole river. It was
hopeless. Ogmin could manage nothing more than a dog paddle. Even if
the river had been as peaceful as the fish pond they had paddled their
feet in when they were little, she wouldn't have been able to make
it. Hot tears of anger and frustration welled up in his eyes.

"..our..ighness.." Prince Thokmay looked up at the sound. Could the
Blightwater talk?

"...here..." He looked wildly around, and then up.  Charger was racing
toward them, dropping as it approached. Noxy and Sergeant Gyalpa waved
at him from the cloud's back.

"Over here!" he shouted. He waved his arms and laughed. "We're over
here!" Ogmin looked up and shrieked, then started waving her arms as
well.

"Down!" Noxy mind-ordered Charger. The Blightwater was still rising,
faster now as it sensed that its prey might escape it.

"Bad!" the cloud thought back emphatically. "Bad!"

"Down!" Noxy ordered again, but try as she might, she couldn't get
Charger to drop down any further.

"She won't do it!" Noxy said in despair. "She's too scared!"

"You just have to get us close enough for this," the sergeant said,
uncoiling the rope he'd brought.

Noxy brought Charger in low over the little island so that the sergeant
could lower one end of the rope. "Hurry up, Your Highness!"  he
bellowed.

"Can you lift us both?" the prince shouted back. "We're a bit short on
time down here."

"Blazes," the sergeant cursed. "No!" he shouted. "But if you can both
hang on, we can get you to shore."

Prince Thokmay grabbed the free end of the rope and tied it under his
sister's armpits, then lifted her arms. "Hold on really, really
tight," he told her, putting her hands on the rope. "No matter what
happens. All right?"

"All right," she said in a small voice.

He kissed her cheek. "You're very brave," he told her. "When we get
back to Apple Bridge, I'll buy you all the beaver tails you can eat, I
promise." He reached up and grabbed the rope himself, then shouted,
"Ready!"

Sergeant Gyalpa wrapped his end of the rope behind his back and sat
down on the cloud with his legs spread. "All right," he said to Noxy.
Noxy pursed her lips and flashed an angry command at the cloud. Charger
lifted slowly, then swung toward the riverbank.

"We're up!" the prince shouted. For a moment everything seemed to be
working, but then suddenly they dropped down a hand's breadth.

"I can't get a footing!" the sergeant yelled. Noxy watched in horror
as his feet slid deeper and deeper into the cloud under the weight of
the prince and princess. The rope was cutting into Cloud as well,
making a deep rift that slowly let Thokmay and Ogmin drop further and
further toward the river.

"Just a few more heartbeats!" Noxy yelled. "Thokmay, hang on! Hang on!"

"Lift up your feet," Thokmay grunted at his sister. He could *smell*
the Blightwater, it was so close.

"I'm scared!" Ogmin said.

"Just lift up your feet, it's going to be all right," he told her. Ten
yards... eight... five...

His heels splashed into the river. "Run!" he shouted at his sister. A
hundred tiny tendrils tugged at his boots as he pushed her through the
reeds toward the bank. The soft mud underneath them seemed to be
coming alive. They scrambled up, grabbing bushes and branches and
dandelions and anything else that offered a handhold, until finally
they reached the top of the riverbank and flopped down.

Prince Thokmay lay there for a moment, panting, then rolled over and
started untying the knot around his sister. "Thokmay?" she asked.

"Mm hm?" he gasped as he undid the last of the knot.

"I *really* want to go home."

## The End of the Letter

*Your Majesty,* Thokmay began, as always. Then he paused, listening to
the rain tap against the window as he wondered one more time what it
would have been like to grow up calling his father something a little
less formal than that. Ogmin was singing to herself in the next room,
and he could hear Dolly's voice as well, although he couldn't make out
what she was saying.

He dipped his pen in the inkwell and continued. *1. I am writing to
inform you that my tutor has decided to leave your service to pursue
opportunities elsewhere. I have been well pleased with him,
particularly during the recent difficulties described in the reports
which I trust you have by now received. Unless I am instructed
otherwise, I shall commend him to future patrons.*

Although I probably won't need to do so soon, Thokmay added
mentally. He had tried to talk the orangutan out of leaving, but Mope
had made up his mind. "It's time I did something as myself," Mope had
said, his face even longer than usual. "I've been trying to train you
like the circus man trained my father. It's time I did a few of my own
tricks for a change."

"Where will you go?" Thokmay asked.

The orangutan twiddled his big toes. "Former or Latter Tongsa,
perhaps, or Chaghan. Or maybe even Garheim. Anyone can argue the law
in Garheim."

"Argue the law?" "Garheim?" Noxy and the prince asked simultaneously.

"Absolutely," Mope said earnestly. "Eloquence and logic, logic and
eloquence, that's the key. Did you know that gifted animals still
aren't allowed to own land in Former Tongsa? They can in Chaghan, but
they need a human's permission to marry. And there was a monstrous
case in Garheim, Your Highness will remember we discussed it some
months ago, which concluded that---"

"Enough, enough," the prince laughed. "If anyone can talk the world
into better shape, you can." On an impulse he hugged his tutor.

"I'll miss you," he said softly.

The orangutan hugged him back clumsily. "And I you, Your Highness," he
said. "You had a pretty good sense of humor, for a human."

The ink on Thokmay's pen had dried. He wiped it carefully on a scrap of
paper, then dipped it in the inkwell again. *2. Noxy of Stale has
rejoined her companions. They are returning to the mountains for the
winter, but I have taken the liberty of extending her the freedom of
Gandan, and have invited her to visit the capital whenever she might
choose to do so.*

"Or something like that," the prince muttered under his breath. The
other cloudherds had flown into Apple Bridge the day before. They had
been appalled by the destruction, and Aft had been furious when she
had learned of the part that Noxy had played.

"Charger could have been torn to shreds!" Aft raged. "And you too!
You could have been killed!"

Noxy folded her arms and glared at the older woman. "Or half of Gandan
could have been flooded with poisonous old magic. Or Princess Ogmin
could have drowned when her raft floated away." That was the story the
prince, Sergeant Gyalpa, and Noxy had agreed on during the flight back
to Apple Bridge---the princess had been playing on a raft, and it had
floated away. Mope had thanked them for that. "Or I could have tripped
over a pebble and broken my nose. Would you have liked that more?"

Neither saw the amused looks on the other cloudherds' faces, but the
prince did. "We are of course grateful for Noxy's assistance in this
matter," he said hastily in his most soothing official voice. On an
impulse, he took off his signet ring and offered it to the young
cloudherd. "In recognition of which, we offer her the freedom of
Gandan, so that she may travel throughout the kingdom without
hindrance, and call upon His Majesty's servants for aid as she may
require." For the first time, the prince was glad that Mope had made
him practice that speech so many times, so that he could say it
without stumbling.

Aft had glowered at the prince and Noxy as the young cloudherd had
taken the bracelet and put it on her own arm, but the other cloudherds
had clapped. It was a rare honor, they all knew, for someone to be
given the freedom of the kingdom.

Noxy and the prince said their real good-byes an hour later. "I'm glad
you let me stay," Noxy said, stroking Charger's flank, somehow not quite
able to meet the prince's eyes.

Prince Thokmay realized that she felt as awkward as he did, but that
didn't make him feel any better. "I'm glad too," he said. He paused a
moment, then added, "Even if all of this hadn't happened, I'd be
glad." He waved at her a few moments later as Cloud climbed into the
sky, breathless at how soft her lips had been.

There was a clatter next door. "Excuse me, Your Highness," Dolly
called out, "But will Her Highness be needing her summer dresses, or
may I put them in storage?"

"Pack everything, please," Prince Thokmay replied loudly. "We won't be
coming back."

There was a moment's silence, and then the door to the prince's study
slowly creaked open. Princess Ogmin peeked around the door. She was
still wearing a dark brown silk scarf on her head, despite the number
of times Dolly and the prince had told her how grown-up her short hair
made her look.

"Are we going home?" Ogmin asked.

"Mm hm," the prince said. He tried to smile at her, but it wouldn't
stay on his face. "We really are."

"Wheee!" Ogmin shrieked. She bounded into the room and hugged him.
"We're going home!"

"Whoa, whoa!" he laughed, "Watch out for the inkpot!" He hugged her
tight, so that he could wipe his eyes without her seeing him do it,
then let her go. "But only if you help Dolly pack, all right?"

"I'll help!" she promised. She ran out of the room. "Did you hear? Did
you?" he heard her say.

It wasn't Dolly who answered. "What's 'home'?" Dambu asked
uncertainly.  Prince Thokmay stared down at his letter as Princess
Ogmin tried to explain. The sergeant had been unconscious for two
entire days after the fight at the dam. When she had awaken, her mind
had been as clear and as empty as a baby's. It had only taken her a
few days to remember how to feed herself, but her progress since then
had been slow. She seemed to remember nothing of her former life, and
her former apprentices said she probably never would.

Princess Ogmin was still in the middle of her description of the
wonderful things to eat in the capital when Dambu interrupted. "Do you
think we should call this one Rose?" she asked. "Or Lily?"  The prince
could imagine her holding up one of Ogmin's many dolls.

"Lily," the princess said decisively. "Because her hair is so
beautiful."

The prince smiled and turned back to his letter and wrote, *3. As
there is no longer an immediate threat to Apple Bridge, and as I
believe your daughter would be happier in the familiar surroundings of
the capital, I am returning to Gandan with her at the earliest
opportunity.* He had lain in bed most of the previous night, watching
the moon rise and then set, trying to work up the courage to write
those words. For a moment, he imagined himself crumpling up the letter
and starting a new one.  Instead, he took a deep breath, drew a
diagonal line across the empty space on the page, and at the bottom
wrote, *Your dutiful*.

He hesitated only a moment before adding, for the first time, *and
loving*, then finished, *son, Thokmay Gandan-o Prince*. He let his breath
out with a whoosh, put his pen back in the inkwell, folded the letter,
dripped some wax on it, and pressed his signet ring into the wax to
seal it. Then he leaned back in his chair and stretched like a cat.

Years later, when his hair was starting to turn gray and the scar the
world's last wolf had left in his arm ached in cold weather, Prince
Thokmay finally heard what had happened when his father had received
that letter. "He just smiled," the old steward said to him. "Like he
used to sometimes before your mother passed away." But there are many
more stories to tell before that one.
