---
title: "…But With a Whimper"
template: page
fiction: true
---

<div align="center">
<p><img src="@root/files/fiction/on-spec-fall-2007.jpg" alt="On Spec Fall 2007" /></p>
<p>First published in <em>On Spec</em>, Fall 2007.</p>
</div>

The small cottage stood on the shoulder of one of the rounded hills that
made its particular corner of Sussex a quiet paradise for walkers. Not
that its single resident walked much any more; seven decades, an
accumulation of minor wounds, and the rheumatism to which his family was
prone had rendered him stiff and slow for many years.

He pottered about the cottage that evening, muttering under his breath
when the potatoes took overlong to cook. He had debated retiring to
something much larger, with servants, a shooting range, and a proper
library, but in the end had decided, regretfully, that it would be too
much at odds with the ascetic image he had coached the good doctor to
create. And as he had pointed out to the genial old bumbler at their
last dinner in London, the bric-a-brac with which he would fill a larger
establishment would just provide more cause for squabbling to the
treasure hunters who would undoubtedly descend upon it after his expiry.

At first they had come in their dozens: self-appointed scholars (mostly
young, pale, and earnest) eager for talismans to set on the narrow
mantlepiece of their draughty one-room flats, or American ladies of a
certain age, all aflutter to meet the great detective. One had even
brought a list, typed on a Baldingham Model 20 with an erratic 'r': the
deerstalker he had never actually worn, the Turkish slipper in which he
kept his tobacco, or his Webley. As always, the old man had carefully
hinted at desperate requests from various ministries for his assistance
before sending her on her way. Her bright eyes and shallow breathing had
hinted at interesting complexities of character; had he been even a few
years younger, he would have tried to turn his reputation into a quick
tumble, as he had with so many of his clients. Muttering, "Oh, Irene,
Irene," at just the right moment was such a wicked pleasure…

It was to his slipper that the old man turned when his evening meal was
done and the dishes stacked in the sink for the village girl who would
look in the next morning. He set it atop the yard-high pile of books
beside his armchair before filling, tamping, and lighting his pipe. He
had given up rough shag for a lighter Cuban blend some years before, but
still missed the claws of his old favorite in his lungs. Especially on
nights like this: the little straw he had left in the jamb of his back
door had been in place when he returned from his constitutional that
afternoon, but the sprig of rosemary on the kitchen floor had been
trodden on.

An hour passed, and another. The bell in the tower of the village church
three miles away, forged to celebrate the end of the Great War, rang
ten. He started from an apparent doze.

"Who's there?" he demanded querulously. "Show yourself! I warn you, I
have a gun!"

A low chuckle answered. "Yes, I know," said a cultured mid-Atlantic
voice. "A Nagant .22, is it not? With seven shots? In your right
pocket?"

By the time the speaker was finished, the old man had drawn the weapon
in question. His aim was much steadier than his voice. "I said show
yourself!"

"Please don't bother to dissemble," the voice said. "You do a fine
imitation of sleep, but after the granulated coffee you put on your ham
in place of pepper, I was surprised you even managed to get your eyes
closed. Would you like me to open the curtain?"

"I should *like* you to get out of my house," the old man snapped, his
earlier pretence at frailty gone. Not for the first time, he cursed his
creaking frame—he had fumbled slightly when palming the coffee. And his
ears, too—there was something familiar in that nasal voice, but he could
no longer tell if the h's were being aspirated or not.

"In a moment," the intruder said. "By the way, I replaced the rounds in
your revolver with blanks this morning while you were inspecting your
beehives."

The old man hefted the gun. "Mm. You'll forgive me if I don't
immediately set it aside?"

"As you wish." Fabric swished as the blackout curtain that still hung
over the picture window in the cottage's eastern wall was drawn aside. A
gibbous moon, five days past full, limned the figure of a slim man in a
suit of a cut the old man had not seen before, though he judged it
American. He wore no gloves, but fiddled absently with a ring on the
fourth finger of his right hand; his hair was freshly barbered in a
style contemptuous of his burgeoning bald spot.

But it was his face that gave the game away. "You're a Moriarty, or I'm
Guy Fawkes!" the old man exclaimed.

The man at the window sketched half a bow. "Bravo. I'm glad to see your
eyes are still working, no matter what state the rest of your faculties
are in."

The old man snorted. "I assure you, young man, my faculties are in
perfect order." He slipped his hand into the slipper at his side and
raised it to point at the intruder's chest. Fragrant tobacco spilled
onto the floor, but the old man's aim didn't waver.

The younger man laughed. "What are you going to do, pummel me to death?"

He was answered by a soft *click*. "It's a Remington, in case you're
wondering," the old man said conversationally. "I picked it up in Italy
some years ago. It only holds two rounds, but at this distance…" He
shrugged slightly.

The other man clapped softly. "Bravo," he repeated, a note of genuine
admiration in his voice. "Really, I'm impressed. And relieved, to tell
you the truth. I was so afraid you'd be too far gone to make this
worthwhile."

The old man snorted again. "There's hardly much point in revenge this
late in the day, is there?"

"Oh, I think there is. Especially after what you did to my father."

"What I did to your—hah!" The old man's single sharp laugh was like a
collie's bark. "It was a fair fight!"

"I'm not talking about the fight. I'm talking about afterward. You and
your half-wit amanuensis turned our father into a monster."

"The man was a thief," the old man said shortly. "And if I recall
correctly, he hired someone to shoot me."

"He was a petty embezzler who panicked when he realized you were going
to ruin his reputation for the sake of a few headlines! But you—*you*
turned him into a 'Napoleon of Crime'. *You* changed the names of
everyone else in your cases, but not his. Our mother…" The young man
swallowed, then resumed more quietly. "Mother took her own life, did you
know that? No one would have her in their house, not even after we moved
to Chicago. She couldn't bear it."

The old man grunted. "So you have two reasons to kill me instead of one.
I fail to see how that alters the current situation."

"Oh, I'm not here to kill you." The young man's voice was as fine as
silk. "I'm here to let you know that I already have."

"Really? Some slow-acting poison? Or a bomb under your waistcoat to
escort us both into oblivion? Do your worst, I say. To tell you the
truth, I'd rather have my story end with a bang than be found stone cold
one morning in my dressing gown with my hair uncombed." He released the
Remington's hammer and dropped the slipper contemptuously back on the
stack of books.

But the young man was shaking his head. "No poison, no bombs, not for
you. No, for *you*, I have something new—a whole new type of crime."

"Bah!" The old man made no effort to keep the disdain from his voice.
"There's no such thing. Murder, theft, blackmail—the costumes change,
but the cast remains the same."

"Ah, that's where you're wrong. Here." He drew a broad envelope from
inside his coat and, stepping forward, handed it to the old man. "Turn
on the light if you want—I believe your glasses are at your elbow."

Grumbling, the old man switched on the electric lamp that hung over his
armchair and perched his glasses on his nose. The envelope was of plain
white stock, such as any newsagent or stationer might sell, unadorned by
lettering or postage, and unsealed. He slid half a dozen sheets of
newsprint from it and unfolded them in his lap.

The young man watched silently as the old one perused the material. They
were front pages from the *Times*, spanning the years 1893 to 1921. When
he flipped the first one over, the young man said, "No, no, it was right
there in front of you. Look closely."

The old man ignored him and studied the second sheet, the third, the
fourth. Only then did he hesitate. "That can't be right. That was…"

"That was the day the headline said, 'Great Detective Cracks the Case',
is that what you were going to say?" The young man tsk'd. "Go back to
the first one. No mention of Lord Saltire at all, is there? And the
second—dear me, it seems Mister Harker's murder was solved by the Yard
on its own, without any help from you."

The old man tossed the sheets of newspaper aside. "What kind of game is
this?"

"A new kind. Here." The young man drew a small book from his pocket and
tossed it at the older, who caught it one handed and held it up to the
light to study.

"A pirated edition of the doctor's memoirs, printed in America some time
before the war. What has this to do with anything?"

"Take a look at the catalog card inside."

The old man drew it out. "Fiction?" He scowled at the slip of cardboard.
"Why would they file it under fiction?"

"They didn't," he replied. "*I* did. In New York, and Washington, and
now in London and Edinburgh too. And it's not just the doctor's memoirs.
Debrett's, the Britannica, every newspaper you were ever mentioned in,
every photograph that was ever taken of you—everything altered,
relabelled, or destroyed."

"Preposterous! It would take an army to do all that!"

The young man didn't show his teeth when he smiled, or any sign of human
warmth. "No, just a few starving librarians, and some intimacy with the
bureaucratic mind. People are actually rather sheep-like, you see; no
matter what they *know*, they'd never dare contradict a reclassification
circular from the New York Public Library or the Bibliotheque National."
His smile broadened. "Would you like to know what the best part was? For
twenty pounds, I had a curator at the National Portrait Gallery replace
your picture with one of a spiritualist named Doyle."

"A spiritualist!?" the old man spluttered. "But—this is preposterous!
There are thousands of people who know who I am! And tens of thousands
who know what I've done!"

"Thousands of *old* people," the young man corrected. "Thousands of
*very* old people who will soon be very *dead* people, and then what?
You won't be forgotten—too many small boys have play-acted at being
detectives for that to happen. But as far as history is concerned,
you'll be no more real than Falstaff or Paul Bunyan or the 'Napoleon of
Crime' you turned my father into. Someone with your name will be
remembered, sir, but not you."

With a slight bow—no more, really, than a nod of his head—the young man
turned toward the door. The old man struggled to his feet. His heart was
pounding. It was impossible. It had to be a joke, a ruse, part of some
larger plot. "Falstaff?" he snarled. "Paul Bunyan?" His chest—it felt
like he'd been kicked by a horse. He went down to his knees, tobacco
spilling onto the cottage floor as he drew the Remington from his
slipper.

The young man paused, his hand on the door, but didn't turn around. "In
the back, sir?" he asked quietly.

The old man didn't answer. His hands were shaking too much to cock the
pistol. Sparkling dots swam before his eyes as the future strolled
whistling down the path, leaving a legend behind it.
