---
title: "Hi Greg, It's Your Conscience Speaking"
date: 2020-08-07
---

*Hey Greg.*

Hi, Conscience. We haven't spoken in a while...

*No worries. How's work?*

You know---busy busy busy.
75 people have certified as [RStudio instructors](https://education.rstudio.com/trainers/) so far this year,
and our [interns](https://education.rstudio.com/tags/internship/) did some great stuff this summer.

*Sounds like you've been busy.*

Just trying to stay out of trouble.
Did I mention that the teaching book is being
[translated into Spanish](https://teachtogether.tech/es/index.html)?

*Uh, I don't think so...*

I'm not able to contribute, but it's great to see.
Oh, and we're about to deliver the book on research software engineering---it should
go to the publisher some time in the next few weeks.

*Congratulations!*

Thanks---Damien Irving, Kate Hertweck, Luke Johnston, Joel Ostblom, and Charlotte Wickham have all done great work.
It was still nice to get back to coding on [TidyBlocks](https://tidyblocks.tech) for a bit, though.

*Maya's intern project from last summer?*

That's the one.
She and Justin Singh and I rebuilt it---cleaned up code generation,
gave it a React UI,
the whole works.
People have started translating it too, which I'm very grateful for.
I'm now trying to figure out if there's a way to connect it to [Glosario](https://carpentries.github.io/glosario/).

*...uh...*

An open source glossary of data science terms
that can be used interactively and to help make lessons more findable.
Ian Flores Siaca, François Michonneau, and Zhian Kamvar have made it an R package
and are working on a Python version as well.
It gave Ian something to do while we were waiting on ethics approval for his research project.

*His---*

---research project, yeah.
Ian's looking at how data scientists find errors in data analyses;
Kelly Bodwin, Amelia McNamara, Allison Theobold, Philipp Buckhardt, and Rebecca Nugent are all helping out.
What's really neat is that Derek Robinson at the University of Victoria is going to replicate the study in Python,
which should give us even more insight.

*You <b>have</b> been busy.*

Right?
That's why the papers on making research results more findable
and how researchers can stay safe online have been taking so long to wrap up.
But at least the one on live coding is done:
Lex Nederbragt did a lot of heavy lifting on that one with me, Alison Hill, and Rayna Harris as the backup band.

*You're mixing your metaphors.*

Sorry about that.
Anyway,
what's up?

*I was just going to ask how your new year's resolution not to take on too many things was going,
but it sounds like this isn't the right time.
I'll check in again next year.*

Wait---I forgot to mention the mentorship program!
