---
layout: page
title: "Not on the Shelves (Version 3 / 2009)"
---
<h2><em>The Architecture of Open Source Applications</em></h2>

<p>This survey, which is intended for use in a senior undergraduate
course, describes the architecture of a dozen pairs of open source
applications: Apache and LigHTTPD, Firefox and Opera, Gnumeric and
OpenOffice Calc, and so on.  For each pair, the book lays out the key
characteristics of the problem domain, sketches a "reference
architecture" for a solution, then dissects the chosen applications in
detail, describing where, how, and (most importantly) why they differ
from, or elaborate on, the reference architecture.  Each chapter is a
useful introduction to the innards of the systems it discusses, but
together, they provide compelling examples of how to design and
explain large pieces of software.</p>

<h2><em>The Design and Implementation of Virtual Machines</em></h2>

<p>With the exception of C/C++, most widely-used languages today sit
on top of some kind of virtual machine.  However, while undergraduates
are routinely taught how to build compilers, they are rarely if ever
shown how VMs work.  This textbook corrects that via stepwise
refinement: the first three chapters present a very simple direct
interpreter, which each of the next 11 chapters improves in some
way. More focused than either of Smith &amp; Nair's or Craig's books,
<em>DIVM</em> is also an excellent introduction to systems
programming.</p>

<h2><em>Debuggers: Theory and Practice</em></h2>

<p>Despite their importance, debuggers are ignored by both educators
and authors. In part, this is because there isn't a tidy theory to
teach, as there is with (for example) parsers or databases, but in
part there is also an element of disdain for something that is "just a
tool". As this book shows, it might be just a tool, but it's a very
complicated tool to get right.  Like Levine's excellent
<a href="http://www.amazon.com/Linkers-Kaufmann-Software-Engineering-Programming/dp/1558604960/"><em>Linkers and Loaders</em></a>
(but unlike Rosenberg's shallow and disappointing
<a href="http://www.amazon.com/How-Debuggers-Work-Algorithms-Architecture/dp/0471149667/"><em>How Debuggers Work</em></a>),
this book delves into the details rather
than glossing over the "hard" bits, and would be a great text for a
second course on computer architecture.</p>

<h2><em>Software Carpentry for Scientists and Engineers</em></h2>

<p>This book is an introduction to basic software development
practices for seniors, graduate students, and professionals whose
background is science or engineering, rather than programming.  After
quick tutorials on the shell, version control, and automated builds,
it introduces Python, which it then uses as a platform on which to
present regular expressions, file system operations, job control,
processing XML and binary data, and so on.  Lots of "how" is mixed in
with the "what": the chapter on writing classes in Python is followed
by one on unit testing, while the chapter on processing XML is
followed by one on design patterns.  While it necessarily glosses over
many fine points, taken as a whole, the book gives scientists and
engineers a useful toolkit, and a sense of where to go next.</p>

<h2><em>Software Tools for the World-Wide Web</em></h2>

<p>Kernighan and Plauger's <em>Software Tools</em> was one of the most
influential books in the history of computing, as it introduced a
whole generation of programmers to the Unix philosophy of tool-based
computing.  In retrospect, one of the reasons that philosophy
succeeded was its reliance on a universal data format (strings of
ASCII text) and communication protocol (stdin, stdout, and exit(N)).
This book's starting point is the now-commonplace observation that XML
and HTTP have taken their place, and goes on to build a suite of
ever-more-sophisticated tools for assembling web-based applications
that use them.  Crucially, the author does not shy away from the
thorny issues of transactions and partial failure: from Chapter 8
onward, her examples all discuss the ways in which distributed
applications differs from their desktop predecessors, and how
programmers should take that into account.</p>

<h2><em>Jonad in a Nutshell</em></h2>

<p>Windows PowerShell (originally codenamed Monad) was as
revolutionary in its own way as XML and HTTP: instead of flat text,
PowerShell allowed tools to send one another streams of objects, with
all the flexibility and extensibility that implies.  This book
describes Jonad, an open source workalike that uses Javascript as its
scripting language instead of PowerShell's custom Perl-like syntax.
While it is not (yet) as well-integrated with Linux as PowerShell is
with recent releases of Windows, Jonad has brought thousands of
administrators and power users back to the command line.  These users
will find this reference guide indispensible.</p>

<h2><em>Computing and the Law: A Guide for the Perplexed</em></h2>

<p>The legal aspects of the software business were complicated enough
when the major problem was people using software without paying for
it.  Today, courts and legislatures are routinely asked to deal with
child pornography, file downloading, and a host of other issues whose
nature they barely comprehend, while programmers lose sleep over
privacy, liability, and the like.  This book seeks to help the latter
community by tracing the historical development of patents,
copyrights, and professional responsibilities from the American
Revolution to the present day.  Aimed squarely at programmers with no
prior exposure to legal terminology, it explains concepts clearly, and
provides examples for each. Where they can, the authors concentrate on
principles rather than particular statutes, as the latter are so often
either non-existent or changing rapidly.  This not only makes the book
more readable, it also ensures that it won't quickly be outdated.</p>

<h2><em>Programming Small Devices</em></h2>

<p>This book's aim is to help students who have been spoiled by
gigabytes of RAM and gigahertz processors deal with the harsher,
leaner world of small devices.  Like M&uuml;ldner's
<a href="http://www.amazon.com/C-Java-Programmers-Tomasz-Muldner/dp/0201702797"><em>C for Java Programmers</em></a>,
it assumes readers already know how to program, and focuses on
dispelling their misconceptions and curing their sloppy habits.  What
do you do when you don't have garbage collection?  What do you do when
you don't even have floating point, or when you have to worry about
watts as well as bytes?  Incorporating as it does a dense chapter on
the basics of queueing theory and performance modeling, this is an
excellent introduction to programming in a world where nothing is
free.</p>

<h2><em>Quality Assurance: A Modern Synthesis</em></h2>

<p>Quality assurance (QA) has gone through a not-so-quiet renaissance
in the past ten years, inspired primarily by Extreme Programming and
the surprisingly rapid adoption of JUnit.  A growing number of
programmers actually test their code, and a growing number of those
are building ever-more-advanced tools to help do it.  This survey
describes the principles that underpin those tools, ranging from mock
objects and browser-based acceptance testing to more experimental
ideas of the kind discussed in Zeller's <em>Why Programs Fail</em>.
It then goes on to look at testing as a social science, which may
point the way to the next wave of innovation.</p>

<h2><em>Extensible Programming Systems</em></h2>

<p>Today's computers are millions of times faster than their circa
1970 ancestors; today's programs are hundreds of times more complex;
but today's source code is still a slave to the formatting conventions
of the punch card era.  This book describes a new kind of programming
ecosystem, in which compilers, linkers, debuggers, and other tools are
plugin frameworks, rather than monolithic applications, and programs
are stored as XML documents, so that programmers can store and
manipulate data and meta-data uniformly.  The end result is a
programming environment in which ordinary programmers can define and
share powerful new ways to represent their intentions.</p>

<h2><em>Difference Engines</em></h2>

<p>Modern version control systems do a great job of managing text, but
are much clumsier when it comes to images, MP3s, spreadsheets, and
other so-called "binary" files.  The reason is simple: those formats
are supported by tools for reading and writing, but not for
differencing and merging.  This survey describes the science behind an
open source library of tools (the "engines" of the title) that can
handle many widely-used formats, from structured text like XML to
common audio and video standards.  Some readers will be put off by the
mathematics the authors use when proving bounds on the performance of
the algorithms underlying these tools, but even they should appreciate
the power and elegance of this work.</p>

<h2><em>A Reference Architecture for Web 2.0</em></h2>

<p>The latest generation of web applications use much richer
technologies than their 90s-era forebears. AJAX (Asynchronous
Javascript and XML) is the most visible of these, but under the hood,
frameworks like Ruby On Rails and TurboGears rely on object-relational
mapping, reflection, inversion of control, and many other advanced
techniques. This book describes this "New Standard Model" from the
ground up, showing how the pieces fit together, and discussing what
developers can do when they don't. Its emphasis on testing and
debugging is particularly welcome, as all too often programmers
programmers can only "patch and pray" when something goes wrong
somewhere in the many layers of abstraction that were supposed to make
their lives easier.</p>

<h2><em>Big, Fast, Cheap, or Good: A Student's Guide to Software Project Management</em></h2>

<p>Students' first software projects are different from "real"
industrial projects in many ways: student teams usually don't have a
more experienced project manager to show them the ropes, and team
members are almost always timeslicing their work with other courses.
This down-to-earth book is written with that audience, and those
constraints, in mind.  It takes ideas from Berkun's <em>Art of Project
Management</em>, Doar's <em>Practical Development Environments</em>,
Fogel's <em>Producing Open Source Software</em>, Glass's <em>Facts and
Fallacies of Software Engineering</em>, and Stellman &amp;
Greene's <em>Applied Software Project Management</em>, but explains
them to people who have never before had to find their way around a
large body of code, or coordinate with half a dozen other people.</p>

<h2><em>Exploring Computer Science with Python</em></h2>

<p>Among the literally thousands of introductory texts on computer
science, the few that used Python have never really caught on.  This
book may change that: it covers the same broad range of topics as
Brookshear's popular <em>Computer Science: An Overview</em>,
introducing Python almost as a side effect of explaining what
algorithms are, how computers represent information, and why perfect
security will never be possible.  While the pace and depth probably
put it out of reach for some students, those thinking about majoring
in CS will find it an excellent, practical grounding in the
discipline.</p>
